# Section 4: Price Control Causes Transaction Cost to Increase

As discussed in the previous section, the analysis of MSE focuses on the so-called shortage is meaningless and has been refuted by facts. There are two other points should be paid attention to about price control. Firstly, some goods are not paid directly at visible price, but indirectly in other ways. If government controls those indirect ways, it is also price control. For example, the time that TV audiences spend on watching advertisements is an indirect price to pay for TV programs, so it is actually a kind of price control if government imposes restriction on TV advertisement.

Secondly, some think that government regulation is always invalid, which is true seen from the example of rent control. The rent actually paid by the tenant is still RMB1000 a month which is the same as the equilibrium price originally and just is not all in the name of rent, but part of RMB200 as “contract fee”. Judging from whether the government regulation has achieved its original stated goal, price control is totally a failure, so it is an “evil policy” and should not be implemented.

It has been discussed in detail in Lecture 5 that the question of “ought to be” belongs to moral ethics, and should not be answered by economics. However, if an objective standard can be specified in advance, and based on which the conclusion of empirical analysis is judged, then it has become normative analysis in economics. Here is a general objective standard for all the normative economics to judge if a government policy is good or bad, that is, if the objective effect of a policy is the original goal it claims to achieve. If it is, it is a “good policy”, while if it is not, it is an “evil policy”. The rent control is a typical example: government claims to implement this policy in order to decrease the rent burden for the poor. However the empirical analysis as mentioned in previous section shows that the tenant pays no less than before. So a normative conclusion can be come to that rent control is an “evil policy” that should not be implemented.

In other words, to judge if a policy is good or bad does not depend on what good purpose it claims to achieve, but on what actual effect it results in, which is also a philosophical truth. Economics is a science, but what we can learn from it is not only economic theories, but also the way of thinking and even philosophical truth. Here is: do not judge a person by what he says, but what he does! Do not believe what a person claims as subjective motive of his behavior which is neither credible (only God knows if he has lied) nor important, but observe the objective effect of his behavior. You say you love me, but you love me so much that you kill me! I am afraid that I do not want such love.

Some may still argue that the effect of rent control is not good just because it is not perfect enough and government should improve the policy by forbidding all kinds of “contract fee”. However, the example of price control on petroleum has shown that the essence of price control is that it infringes PPRs and makes part of the income ownerless. Self-interested human will always try all the means that government never dreams of to grab the ownerless income. The so-called improvement of policy cannot change the relevant key factors of self-interest, scarcity and competition.
And even if government “improves” the price control such that no one can grab the ownerless income, the result is only all the regulated rent dissipates. How can be it good to society? For example, if government has regulated in great detail and nullified all means for collecting “contract fee”, which means in essence that the transaction cost of contract fee increases to be even higher than the regulated rent, what will be the result? Before rent control when the landlord could get RMB1000 a month from the house, he would furnish the house with furniture. Now with rent control, he can only get RMB800 a month and cannot get back the other rents by “contract fee”, so he will only rent an empty house without furniture. Such an empty house could only be rented out in RMB800 a month even when there was no rent control. Thus government’s rent control is still invalid. Or the landlord will no longer repair and maintain the house from now on, so that the house will depreciate to the level consistent with the regulated rent. All the houses worth more than RMB800 a month in the market will eventually disappear, so those who are willing to pay more rent to improve their living conditions no longer find a house good enough to meet their needs even they have money. Does government really want to achieve such a result by rent control?

In addition, the government regulation is invalid does not mean that it has no adverse impact on society. From the previous analysis, it can be seen that if government strongly enforces rent control and effectively forbid all kinds of ways going around the regulation such as contract fee, there will be only very bad consequences to society.  However, does government regulation have no negative impact on society when there is contract fee? Self-interested people will compete for the ownerless income due to price control, which will cause transaction cost. Self-interested people will try to minimize the transaction cost which is not zero, so there is an increase in transaction cost in the regulated society compared with the unregulated one.

Take rent control as an example. When there is no rent control, the cost for the house is RMB1000. When there is rent control, the cost for the house is the sum of RMB800 in the name of rent and RMB200 in the name of contract fee. It seems that there is no difference. However, when there is no regulation, there is only one price to be set by the landlord and tenant (i.e. rent of RMB1000).  After rent control, there are two prices to be set (i. e. rent of RMB800 and the monthly contract fee of RMB200), so there is more transaction cost than before. Of course, the increase in transaction cost here is almost negligible, because the rent of RMB800 is set directly based on the government regulated price, while the contract fee of RMB200 is set based on the difference between the market rent and the regulated price. It is precisely why contract fee is chosen as the least costly way to go around the rent control.

Nevertheless, it is only because in the house leasing market it is easy to find this way that there is little increase in transaction cost under certain constraints. In many cases, it is not so “lucky” under other constraints. Let's turn to the example of price control for petroleum. The gas station get back the regulated price of petroleum by tie sale of it and lubricants and increasing the price of lubricants, which increase much more transaction cost than contract fee in the house leasing market. A car that does not need to be lubricated at all will have to be done so in order to refuel without queuing. It is obviously a waste to be more frequently lubricated than necessarily, which implies transaction cost. And some will choose not to let their cars be lubricated but to queue up. By standing there and waiting idly, no one can benefit from the cost of time, which is a greater waste. It means that the transaction cost of queuing is higher than that of using too much lubricant. That is why the gas station encourages customers to choose lubricant. However, different people have different cost of time, so there are still a considerable number of people who think queuing is a better choice. In short, under the constraints faced by the gas station, the transaction cost caused by price control for petroleum has been kept as low as possible, but it is still obviously higher than that in the house leasing market.

In fact, neither does the story in the house leasing have a happy ending. When government finds that contract fee is used to invalidate the rent control, it will come up with various supplementary policies to prohibit contract fee. Under this new constraint, the landlord has to think of new countermeasures which will definitely increase transaction cost, maybe to be even be much higher than that caused by tie sale of petroleum and lubricants in the price control for petroleum. Thus, although government regulation is always invalid, it does not mean that it has no adverse impact on society which refers to an increase in transaction cost.

There are two reasons for government to implement “evil policy”: one is ignorance, the other is impudence. On the one hand, government may neither know the regulation will be only invalid, nor that if it tries to strengthen the regulation, it will only cause an increase in transaction cost. On the other hand, government is only a virtual concept, and it is government officials who are really alive, and they are also human and self-interested. They implement price control not because they are ignorant, nor because they really want help the poor (i.e., their claimed purpose is in fact just a pretense), but because regulation gives them power. When there is regulation, it is necessary to establish an organization (such as the Housing Department for rent control) to increase government spending which can feed or even fatten many government officials. In Lecture 2, it has been reminded that economics is a social science, which causes much trouble compared with a natural science: one is ignorance which leads to wrong application of economics, but the biggest trouble is that economists are also human and self-interested, and will deliberately distort economic analysis to deceive the public and benefit themselves. Those in favor of price control are mostly the laymen of economics who are ignorant, but some are economists. They have studied economics and still support price control, few of whom may be as ignorant as the laymen and should retake the course of economic, but I am afraid most of whom are imprudent.

Some may sympathize with the poor, and ask, “Without price control, what can the poor who cannot afford the price in the market do?” Firstly, from the above analysis, it is clear that price control cannot help the poor, but will only increase the transaction cost and make the whole society poorer.

Secondly, as long as the transaction cost is low enough, the market can satisfy any needs of all kinds of people (including the poor, of course). For example, many live under the same roof the share the rent, or a house is divided into several small single rooms which are rented separately, or even just a bed is rented out. The market will always supply goods of different quality according to different capacities of paying, and satisfy all kinds of demands. There is a saying that “big chickens do not eat small rice”, which means that big businessmen disdain to earn small money and therefore disdain to serve small customers. However, in reality, big chickens eat big rice, small chickens eat small rice, and even broken rice is eaten by worms. As long as there is rice, no matter how small it is, there will always be someone to eat it. As long as there is money, no matter how small it is, there will always someone to earn it. Therefore, as long as there is demand, there will be always supply and there will be always a market to take care of the demand. It is important for government not to interfere, misunderstanding that it can help the poor by preventing sellers from earning money which only results in strangling the supply for the demand.
