# Section 3: The Concept of Rent from the First Perspective

The concept of rent has not been introduced until now, because it is much easier to understand based on the explanation in previous section. There are two perspectives for the understanding of the concept of rent, which are actually the same.

From the first perspective of the historical evolution of the concept, rent is the income of production factor or the value of asset. Maybe many readers have guessed from the term of rent that it originally referred to the rent of land. That is right! In the period of classical economics, although the industrial revolution had begun in Britain, economists were still mainly concerned about the activities in agriculture. And land is the most important production factor in agriculture, so rent of land, as the income of land, was analyzed in detail by classical economists.

As mentioned in the previous lecture, classical economists advocated the theory of labor value which means the value of a good only comes from labor, so the income from a good should only be distributed to labor. However, when classical economists observed agricultural production, they faced a huge puzzle: why can a landlord collect rent? The rent of land is, of course, the income of land, but the landlord does not work by himself, and just leases the land to the farmers who work.

This obvious fact clearly has refuted the theory of labor value and hit classical economists hard. When a theory is refuted by facts, what a scientist should do is either to revise the theory or completely abandon it. In the previous lecture, we have introduced how Ricardo tried to revise the theory of labor value by narrowing the scope of application to exclude antiques which obviously refuted the theory regarding historical cost as cost. Of course, his revision failed to save the theory, because there are many goods other than antiques such as masks during SARS that also refute it. That is why economists completely abandoned the theory of labor at last, replacing historical cost with opportunity cost.

However, there is also another unscientific way: to use subjective value judgment to deny the objective facts. For example, when the price of mask during SARS rose sharply, people including laymen and incompetent or impudent economists would like to accuse mask suppliers of making profit when the nation was in trouble. They simply labeled the suppliers as immoral without any scientific explanation for the rise in price, which was essentially ostrichism refusing to face the reality. If this kind of ostrich policy became the basis for government’s decision, it would be impossible to effectively solve the problems because the relevant behavior (rise in the price of masks) had not been scientifically explained. As a result, government would impose such s counterproductive policy as price control.

The theory of labor value only regards labor as the only source of the value of a good, which has been clearly refuted by the fact that a landlord who does not work at all can collect rent. Marx defined the collection of rent by a landlord as “exploitation”, which meant he still insisted that all income from land should only be distributed to labor, and just a part of the income was exploited by the landlord in the form of rent. Marx lived in the era of industrialization, so when he further extended this “exploitation theory” to industrial production, he naturally deduced the “theory of surplus value” that capitalist exploit workers.

The concept of exploitation is full of subjective value judgment (moral judgment). And if it is regarded as truth, the policy proposal must be prohibition of landlords from exploiting farmers, which means landlords are not allowed to collect rent, so that farmers get all the income from lands. However, if landlords could not get any income, they must take back their lands and not lease to farmers as a countermeasure. Then how could agricultural production be carried out without lands and only with the labor of farmers? As a result, if one insisted on the theory of labor value in classical economics, he must also insist on the exploitation theory and the theory of surplus value of Marx, and finally he would logically come to the conclusion that he must advocate “public ownership” which completely deprive landlords of their PPRs of lands and transfer to the nation. Then lands are not owned by specific individuals, but owned by an ambiguous subject, which ensures that lands will be input to agricultural production even if no rent could be collected.

However, public ownership completely violates PPRs, and completely eliminates the market or the price as competition criterion, thus leading to huge rent dissipation (one kind of transaction costs), which results in economy recession and even collapse. Self-interested people have to give up public ownership and return to private ownership in order to reduce transaction cost and survive. One can refuse to face the reality like ostriches, but the reality will not change because he pretends not to see it. Economic laws are the same as physical laws, regardless of whether one likes or not. Whoever does not abide by them will be severely punished.

Back to the concept of rent. The reason why a landlord can collect rent is because the land he owns does contribute to production and is one of the sources of value for the output (agricultural products). Therefore, part of the income from the land must be distributed to the land, actually to the owner of the land. Thus, rent is the income distributed to the land for its contribution to the agricultural production.
Later, Marshall discovered that not only the income of land is rent, but the incomes of all kinds of production factors are also rents. For example, the income of the so-called capitalist does not come from exploitation of the surplus value of workers as Marx said, but from the provisions of two types of production factors.

Firstly, he provides capital, which means he lends his money to himself for production, so he requires relevant income. Seen from the concept of opportunity cost, the essence of it is rather easy to understand. If he does not use the money for production but deposits it in a bank, he has interest as income. Now he uses the money for production, thus giving up the interest of saving, which is his opportunity cost. In fact, when he deposits the money in a bank, the bank just play the role of intermediary to help him lend the money to others who need funds. Therefore, the interest he gives up is the income he can obtain by lending the money to others for production. Seen from another perspective, if he does not use his own money, he can borrow money from a bank, and needs to pay interest. In a word, using one’s own money is actually borrowing money. Just because he borrows money from himself, he pays the interest to himself.

Secondly, the so-called capitalist provides his own labor in management and other aspects, which is mainly mental labor. Blue-collar workers provide mainly manual labor, while white-collar workers provide mainly mental labor. In essence, he rents his labor to himself for production, so he requires relevant income. Seen from the concept of opportunity cost, the essence of it is also rather easy to understand. What he gives up is the wage of renting his own labor to others for production. Therefore, the difference between working for others and self-employment does not lie in whether the labor is rented out or not, but only in whom the salary is paid to.

In Marx’s era, the owner and the manager of a firm were the same person, so Marx could not see clearly that this person actually had played two roles at the same time, and had two incomes at the same time: one is the income of interest as the owner of his own capital, the other is the income of wage as the owner of his own labor. It is somewhat logically similar the situation mentioned in the previous lecture that when there is information cost, historical cost and opportunity cost cannot be clearly separated, so economists misunderstood that people made decisions according to historical cost. Nowadays, corporation has become a very popular form of firm. It is clear that shareholders (the owners of the firm, or strictly speaking, the owners of capital) and managers (strictly speaking, the owners of mental labor) can be two different groups of persons. Shareholders receive dividends, while managers receive salaries, so the owners of different production factors all have their own income. Thus, the income of various production factors is actually the rent paid for leasing them for production.

Since the income of all production factors is their own rent, Marshall generalized the term of “rent” from a narrow sense which only referred to the rent of land to a broad sense which refers to the income of all production factors. At first, in order to distinguish from the narrow sense of rent that people were used to understand, he called the rent in broad sense as “economic rent” or “quasi-rent”. As many developed countries have developed from agricultural economy to industrial economy, the concept of rent is generally recognized in economics as referring to the broad sense.

Look back on the example of the options of a piece of land. There are only two options “Use” and “Not use” when the most roughly observed. It is obvious that “rent of land is the income of land” is actually a particular case of “rent is the income of production factors”.

As will be explained in the later lecture on “Interest Theory”, any that can bring in income is an asset. The purpose of inputting factors to production is to share a part of the output, so production factors are all assets. And assets are valuable because they can contribute to production and get income from it. As mentioned in previous section, income is rent, so rent is the value of the asset. In fact, all that human need is asset, no matter whether they are needed for production or consumption. Consumer goods can also be regarded as production factors, because they can be regarded as reproduction of the labor capacity in human. Thus, all that human need is valuable, can bring in income and has rent. Fundamentally speaking, the value of it is determined by the two constraints of self-interest and scarcity which jointly determine the price of it, and the price constitutes the income for the producers, so the relevant income is the rent of it.

We should be flexible in thinking and observe the same phenomenon from different angles, and then we can really understand how the concepts in economics are connected with each other.
