# Section 4: The Perspective of Contract

Steven. N. S. Cheung generalized the concept of transaction cost to institution cost. However, in order to avoid being too general and becoming tautology without refutability, he advocated to observing transaction cost from a more specific perspective. Different organizational forms are carriers of different institutions, but what on earth are institutions? As mentioned in the previous section, they are the contracts in the market, the rules and disciplines in a firm, the moral customs in a society, the laws and regulations in a nation, the family rules in a family, and the rules and regulations in gangdom.
In fact, they are all contracts! It can be a written contract or a conventional consensus. The contracts signed between parties in the market are certainly those human are used to regarding as contracts, but the rules, disciplines, moral customs, laws and regulations seem to be far from contracts. When one is employed by a firm, he has signed not only a contract of employment, but also accepted the regulations and disciplines made by the firm which is a common contract accepted by all employers of the firm. There are also implicit common contracts (such as practice and national laws) in the market. In western ideology, national laws are “social contracts” signed between people and government. Moral custom is said to be a contract between human and God, because in western myth, the rainbow in the sky after rain is the sign of a contract between human and God.

Of course, the latter two seem to be mandatory compared with the former two. In the market, one can choose not to trade and reject the other party’s contract, while in a firm, one can choose to resign and refuse the rules and disciplines of the firm. However, in a society or a nation, it seems difficult for one to choose not to follow the moral customs or abide by the law. In fact, there are always choices. One can choose to leave the nation he does not like, or live an independent life in a wild mountain region. Just the cost is too high, so most will not choose to do so. It is similar to the cost of suffering a loss or even losing the job if one rejects the other party’s contract in the market or of the firm. It is also similar to one’s obstinate refusal to buy anything because he thinks all goods in the market are too expensive and of poor quality, and then he may starve to death.

From the perspective of contract, the different organizational forms or different institutional arrangements are actually different contractual arrangements, or specifically, different contractual terms. The contract terms which directly measures and sets price are based on price criterion without rent dissipation (a kind of transaction cost), are called price terms or income terms.

However, the cost of measurement (also a kind of transaction cost) is not zero. When it is too high, human will choose to measure indirectly by other contract terms (use terms). Indirect measurement will make the measured person tend to perform the contract ostensibly, causing rent dissipation which is an inevitable result of non-price criteria. Thus, although the cost of indirect measurement is relatively lower, there will be relatively higher supervision cost (management cost or transaction costs). Human will trade-off between higher cost of direct measurement and higher supervision cost of indirect measurement, seeking the lowest total transaction cost of a combination of contract terms, which is similar for consumers to trade-off between different goods, seeking the lowest total cost of a combination of goods.

Thus, what Coase said about replacing the market with firms is actually replacing another combination of contracts (of product sales) with one combination of contracts (of factor purchase or lease). When human choose different institutions, they actually choose different contracts, and the institutional transformation is the change of contractual terms.

Until now, the concept of transaction cost (institution cost) can be introduced. Steven. N. S. Cheung put forward the most appropriate definition of transaction cost as the cost that does not exist in Robinson’s one-man world. He further defined “society” as a world with more than one person. Once there is more than one person, there will be competition between them due to the postulate of self-interest and the constraint of scarcity, and there will be institution cost (transaction cost) because the competition criteria need relevant institutions to support their establishments. In other words, transaction cost is the cost of coordinating the competitive relationship between people and is the cost of society.

Some may ask, “Is the cost of pregnancy transaction cost?” or “Is the cost of a game that needs at least two players such as tennis transaction cost?” Of course not. It is possible for technology to make artificial embryo, sperm or ovum, and even make human single-breeding. It has been possible to simulate an opponent in playing games. Any problem that can be solved by natural science is not related to transaction cost. There are problems of transaction cost that cannot be solved by natural science in the world is precisely why economics or social science is needed besides natural science. The theory of firm with production function as the core in traditional economics does not take transaction cost into account, so is just an engineering theory in essence, not an economic theory at all. Similarly, economics without the concept of transaction cost cannot be real economics.

By the way, what is the relationship between transaction cost and the direct cost and overhead cost mentioned in the previous Lecture 13? There are both transaction cost belonging to direct cost and that belonging to overhead cost. After the establishment of an institution, the transaction cost incurred during the establishment has become historical cost and the recover of it should be treated as overhead cost. When the institution is operating and maintained, the relevant transaction cost is direct cost. For example, the commission paid to the intermediary of a transaction according to the price is a typical transaction cost belonging to direct cost, because the role of the intermediary is to assist the buyer and the seller to find each other and reach a transaction agreement, and what he earns is the transaction cost.