# Section 2: The History of Transaction Cost

What is transaction cost? For this complicated and difficult concept, it is necessary to know the history and follow the whole process of the invention and development of this concept.

Coase was the first economist to invent this concept. He published an article entitled “the Nature of Firm” in 1937, and put forward the concept of “transaction cost”, which was one of his achievements in winning the 1991 Nobel Economics Prize.

Why did Coase invent the concept of transaction cost? He wanted to answer a question in that article: why are there firms? As mentioned at the beginning of Lecture 11, the traditional theory of firm only cares about the problem of input-output which is about how much output a certain input can produce, focusing on the technical characteristics of production, and does not care about the production organization or contract arrangement. In other words, it is essentially an engineering theory, not an economic one at all. No matter in principle or in practice, production does not necessarily have to be organized through firms. Producers can be self-employed individuals or firms. However, in reality, especially in modern society, a large number of productions do be organized through firms. So the question arises: why are there firms? The market can also organize productions. Why are some productions organized by firms?

Some economists believe that teamwork is more efficient than individuals working independently, which is why firms are needed. However, teamwork or cooperative production can also be organized through the market. In reality, many self-employed individuals buy semi-finished products from upstream producers and process them into those closer to finished products, and then sell them to downstream producers for further processing until finished products can be directly sold to consumers. These individuals are linked to teamwork, but they are organized through the market instead of by the boss or manager in a firm. Of course, there is also much teamwork organized through firms. Thus the question remains: why are there firms? The market can also organize cooperative productions, so why are some of them organized by firms?

Coase’s answer is: because there is cost for market to organize productions, which is transaction cost.

Coase did not give a clear definition of transaction cost, but listed the cases where there is transaction cost.

For example, a self-employed individual must firstly buy inputs (production factors) before production, so he must find upstream producers who can provide the inputs to him. It will take time, energy and money which are all transaction costs (information costs). After finding the proper upstream producer, he has to bargain the price, quality, quantity, etc. and may need to sign a contract, which also take time, energy, and money. After the contract is signed, it needs to be executed. He must supervise whether the supplier delivers the goods on time with good quality and quantity in accordance with the terms of the contract, which also causes transaction cost. If the supplier breaks the contract, this individual producer has to negotiate with him. If the negotiation fails, he may have to go to the court and hire a lawyer to file a lawsuit, so the transaction cost will be even higher.

After buying all inputs, this individual produces the outputs by himself. Now he needs to sell the outputs, which means he has to find sellers. He may depend on the distributors to sell his products to consumers indirectly, and there will be additional transaction cost. Even if the products are sold directly to consumers, there will also be all kinds of transaction cost in finding consumers, bargaining prices, quality and quantity with them, signing contracts, executing contracts, negotiating and even filing lawsuits when contracts are broken.

The market is the same as an ordinary commodity in that there is cost for using it. As Friedman said, there’s no such thing as a free lunch, so the market is neither free. In Coase’s view, it is the cost of using the market to conduct transactions, so he calls it transaction cost.

Coase pointed out that the benefit of using firms to organize production is to avoid using the market and thus to avoid paying transaction cost. If the producers in upstream and downstream are just different departments in the same firm, the department in downstream does not need to spend time, energy and monetary to find the upstream producers who can provide inputs, but directly asks the department in upstream to provide inputs. Neither does it need to bargain the price, quality and quantity, but just needs to transport the inputs from the warehouse of the department in upstream to the workshop of the department in downstream according to the instruction of the boss or manager of the firm. And it does not need to sign any contract or even worry that the contract may be broken.

One more example. Suppose one works as a secretary in a firm. In principle, secretarial service can be bought through the market. Imagine that every day one goes to that firm to see what secretarial service the manager needs today, such as how many pages of documents to type or copy, how many cups of tea to serve to visitors, etc. For simplicity, suppose there is only the work of copying. One bargains with the manager to determine the pages of documents, the required quality of copying, the price for the copying service. It is the same as that the manager takes the documents to the copy shop and pay for the service. Now one is not an employee of the firm, but a self-employed individual who runs a copy shop that provides on-site service.

Obviously, it is too troublesome! Every day one goes to the firm without knowing if there is any need for copying, how many it needs, and when it needs, which are all information cost. He also needs to bargain with the manager about the quantity, quality and price of copying the documents, and may even sign a contract. That it is troublesome means there is very high transaction cost in economic terms.

What is more, secretarial service is actually much more than copying, and includes typing, serving tear, and welcoming visitors. Does one need to bargain with the manager about the price and quality for each service, such as how hot the tea should be, how much water should be in a cup, how fast the tea should be served to the visitors, how one should smile when serving the tea ... The transaction cost of using the market is too high. Therefore, we seldom observe the phenomenon of trading secretarial services through the market. More generally, firms recruit secretaries in the labor market, roughly describe the work of secretary, and set a price according to the time (time wage). When one is hired as a secretary in a firm, he must obey the instructions of the manager, without bargaining! That is precisely why using firms can save transaction cost: because one can no longer be choosy and bargain as can be done in the market.

In other words, the market guides individuals to provide products or services through prices: only when they think the price is appropriate, will they provide goods. By contrast, in a firm, they are ordered to provide products or services through the instructions of the boss or manager: no matter they like it or not, as long as they are employees of the firm, they must obey the orders. It seems that transaction in the market is free, while the work in a firm is compulsory. However, there is still a market outside the firm. One is free to choose which firm he likes to work in. If he thinks that the salary the firm offers to him is not worth what he contributes by obeying the manager’s order, he can ask for a salary raise. If he cannot, he is free to quit and find another job. Similarly, if the manager thinks one’s performance is not worth his salary, he can ask for a pay cut. If he cannot, he is free to fire him and hire someone else.
As mentioned before, some economists think that teamwork or cooperative production is the cause of firm. In fact, if cooperative production is organized through the market, the transaction cost is generally very high.

There are two cases. One is the cooperative production along successive links in a chain, which needs to be closely linked in time. For example, every step in a production line can be organized through the market in principle, but the products need to move continuously from upstream to downstream in the production line like running water, so there is not much time for the individuals in each step to bargain.

The other case is that several production links need to cooperate simultaneously. For example, when shooting a film or a TV drama, the cooperation of scenery, lighting, clothing, photography, actors, etc. can be organized through the market in principle, but all need to be carried out at the same time, so they cannot bargain with each other.

Because there is transaction cost, when using the market, one has to go through the process of finding counterparties and bargaining the price, quality and other relevant contract terms, which is rather time-consuming for cooperative production. Therefore, all these production links are put into a firm, and cooperate by obeying the orders of the boss or manager.
