# Section 3: From the Special Transaction Cost to the General Transaction Cost — Methodology of Science (4): Ad Hoc Theory

There is a problem in Coase’s explanation of the cause of firm by transaction cost of the market. Since using firms can avoid transaction cost of the market, why are all productions not organized through firms? Obviously, if there is only cost in using the market, the postulate of self-interest implies that all productions should be organized through firms, and the market should completely disappear. However, in reality, there is still market everywhere. Is it disequilibrium? As pointed out in lecture 7, the seemingly disequilibrium implies that there must be constraint overlooked.

The answer is obvious: there must be also cost for using firms! As mentioned in the previous section, firms instead of the market are used to organize productions, which means the boss or manager’s orders instead of the market price are used to guide the various production factors.

As pointed out in Lecture 6 about the cause of the Great Depression and Lecture 9 about the theory of supply and demand, as long as there is no problem with monetary policy, price is an indicator that transmits information about supply and demand, quality and so on to all parties in the society quickly and generally accurately. People do not need to know what the specific demand and supply are in the market, just adjust their behaviors along with the change in price. The behaviors of different people guided by price are all adjusted in the direction of reaching equilibrium. By contrast, within a firm, there is not price to guide the options of different production factors which only blindly obey the manager’s instructions. The manager can only roughly estimate based on internal information feedback and his experience, so the chance of making mistakes is higher than the price as the guideline.[^1]

What is more, as pointed out in Lecture 4, the market system is price criterion which is a kind of competition criterion. Thus the market is replaced with firms, which means the price criterion is replaced with non-price criterion, and it will lead to rent dissipation. What exactly causes rent dissipation in firms? Among all kinds of production factors, labor is very special. Labor is more effectively motivated by price than any manager's instructions in the world.

Neoclassical economists are used to dividing production factors into two categories: labor and capital. In reality, there are hundreds of production factors, why are they divided into these two categories? Neoclassical economists may say because raw materials, machinery, equipment, land and factory buildings ... are all obtained with money, so they are classified as capital. However, labor is also obtained (rented) with money and why is it not a kind of capital? In fact, labor does be a kind of capital because it can be called human capital.

The reason is: influenced by Marshall, neoclassical economists like to use geometry as a mathematical tool, especially rectangular coordinate system. There are two axes for a rectangular coordinate system, so there are two variables needed. In consumer theory which is used to analyze product market, the two axes represent the quantity of two goods respectively. In the theory of firm, neoclassical economists similarly used two production factors to analyze factor market. However, just as the two goods in the product market only need to refer to good X and good Y, the two production factors in factor market do not need to be specifically designated as labor and capital, and only need to refer to factor X and factor Y.

In the traditional theory of firm which ignores transaction cost and the influence of organizational form or contractual arrangement on production, there is no essential difference between labor and other non-labor factors. However, if the influence of organizational form is taken into account, there will be significant difference between labor and non-labor, because human has his own will, and will not do what he is asked to do. A machine will automatically and consciously operate even without supervision. Human is different. Without supervision, one may try to shirk. Therefore, the boss must send another one to supervise him. But who supervises the supervisor?

There are two kinds of supervision, which is the same as a farmer driving a donkey. A carrot can be hung in front of the donkey to attract it to move forward, and a stick can be used to beat the donkey when it refuses to move forward. A carrot refers to award as incentive, while a stick refers to punishment. If it is a tractor rather than a donkey, obviously the farmer does not need carrot and stick. In other words, compared with non-labor factors, there is additional cost of carrot and stick for labor. If the production is not organized through firms, and the producer is a self-employed individual, naturally he does not need a carrot to motivate him or a stick to punish him, but the price of the market directly motivates and punishes him. Thus, only when there are two constraints (to use labor rather than non-labor in a firm rather in the market), there will be additional cost of carrot and stick.

Coase called the cost of using labor in a firm as management cost. However, the cost of using the market is called transaction cost, while the cost of using firm is called management cost, which is the mistake of “ad hoc theory” in methodology of science.

In Lecture 2, the mistake of tautology has been introduced, which is a statement with empty contents, and is impossible to be refuted. Ad hoc theory is the other extreme, which is a statement with too many contents, and is too easy to be refuted as soon as the constraints change slightly.

Let us take an example of natural science to illustrate. Suppose there are a mobile phone and a cup on the table. Both are stationary, because they are all subjected to a pair of forces with opposite directions and the same magnitude, and are in equilibrium. One is the force upward of the table supporting them, while the other is the force downward. What is the force downward? One can define it in this way: the force on the mobile phone is called “force of phone”, while that on the cup is called “force of cup”. This kind of definition is precisely a typical case of ad hoc theory. When the object to be explained changes from a mobile phone to a cup, the definition of “force of phone” is immediately refuted. Similarly, “force of cup” is also limited to only explaining a cup.

Is it logically similar that Coase defined the cost of using the market as “transaction cost” and the cost of using firms as “management cost”? These two concepts with different names can only explain the cost of the market and that of firms respectively. Once the constraint changes from the market to firms or vice versa, these two concepts will be refuted immediately. In social science (economics), the problem of ad hoc theory is not so easy to be observed as in natural science.

There is no difference in essence between transaction cost and management cost, and a more general concept should be used to unify them, just as “force of phone” and “force of cup” are essentially the same force which is the gravity of the earth. Similarly, in economics, the transaction cost of using the market and the management cost of using firms are essentially the same cost which is transaction cost of using different forms to organize production. Self-interested human will compare the transaction costs of the different organizational forms. With the same production efficiency, human will choose the organizational form with the least transaction cost. It is just like in the market, with the same quality, a buyer will choose the good with the lowest price.

Thus, after Coase, the concept of transaction cost is expanded to include the cost of using firms or management cost.

Let us continue to compare physics with economics. Newton’s concept of gravity is actually ad hoc theory to some extent, because it is only applicable to explain the force of the earth on objects. In fact, there is force of objects on the earth, which is too small relative to the force of the earth. According to Newton’s law of F＝ma, the influence of the force of objects on the earth’s motion (measured by acceleration) is insignificant. However, the mass of stars in space is no longer negligible with respect to the earth, and the concept of gravity should be further generalized to “universal gravitation” which is commonly among various objects.

Logically similarly, the concept of transaction cost in economics also needs to be further generalized to a concept in broader sense. It is Steven. N. S. Cheung who further expands the concept of transaction cost. The market is a kind of institution, and a firm is also a kind of institution. Besides the market and firms, there are other organizational forms in the world, such as family, organization and nation.

As mentioned in Lecture 4, the transaction cost of using the market is not only the cost of finding upstream producers, bargaining price and quality, and so on, but also the cost of game rules supporting the price criterion (i.e. the cost of the legal system protecting PPRs). It is the same for non-market system. For example, there are rules and disciplines in a firm to support the order of the boss or manager, and moral customs in a society, laws and regulations in a nation, family rules in a family, and even in gangdom, there are so-called rules and regulations. Different organizational forms are actually carriers of different game rules or institutions. It is those different institutions that specifically define different organizational forms and apply different competition criteria. They not only organize productions, but also restrict all kinds of behaviors in competition. The use of different organizational forms is actually the use of different institutions, which is not free lunch, and there is different cost for the establishment, operation and maintenance of different institutions. Human choose between different institutions, just as they choose between different goods, and of course, they will choose the institution with the lowest cost.

However, when the market is not used, there is no transaction, so the concept of transaction cost sounds misleading literally. Thus, the so-called transaction cost should be more generally called Institution Cost which is the cost of the establishment, operation and maintenance of institution. Because the concept of transaction cost initiated by Coase has become too popular, it can still refer to institution cost. So it is the compromise: the cost of using the market is the special transaction cost, while the cost of using different institutions is the general transaction cost which is institution cost.

Thus, the function of all kinds of institutions (including the market) is to decrease some kinds of transaction cost, but any institution will inevitably increase other kinds of transaction cost. A certain institution can survive only because the transaction cost it increases is lower than the transaction cost it decreases. For example, if human choose to use the market under a certain constraints, it must be because the transaction cost of using non-market (such as firms, planned economy, etc.) is higher. Although the market will also cause some kinds of transaction cost, it must be relatively lower than other kinds of transaction cost the market can decrease.

Of course, the change in constraints will lead to the change in the transaction cost of different institutions, which may cause human to switch from one institution to another. It is similar to the change in the relative price of different goods, which may cause consumers to switch from one good to another. This is precisely institutional transformation.

By comparing the process of generalizing the concept from “gravity” to “universal gravitation” in physics with that of generalizing the concept from “special transaction cost” to “general transaction cost” (institution cost) in economics, we can not only better understand why the scope of transaction cost is continuously expanding, but also better understand how useful theories (i.e. scientifically truth) are constructed. Ad hoc theory is too easy to be refuted, while tautology is completely irrefutable. Therefore, although they are opposite in nature, the results are the same in that they are neither useful theories. Ad hoc theory and tautology are two extremes on a line, and the useful theories should be located between them by adding appropriate constraints.

There are two ways to construct a useful theory by moving to the middle from the two extremes. One way is to start from tautology and move toward ad hoc theory by adding constraints, which is the basic application of marginal analysis introduced in Lecture 7. A typical example is that the economics is constructed based on the postulate of self-interest (a tautology) with different constraints.

The other way is to start from ad hoc theory and move toward tautology by relaxing assumptions, which is called “generalization”. Here, the development of the concept of transaction cost is a typical example. Firstly, starting from the specific phenomenon of why there are firms, Coase put forward the concepts of transaction cost and management cost, which is ad hoc theory. Other economists followed up the development and gradually generalized to the concept of institution cost which can be used to explain all kinds of organizations.

In scientific methodology, there has always been a dispute between “deduction” and “induction”. In fact, they are only these two ways to construct useful theories. Start from tautology is based on unreal postulate, and seems to be purely logical deduction. However, if constraints as objective facts are not added, it will be unscientific because it is irrefutable. On the other hand, starting from ad hoc theory is based on objective facts (experiences), and the commonness (laws) of a large number of similar phenomena are sought to realize generalization. Both roads lead to Rome, and they are just applied to different phenomena.

- - - -

[^1]: F. A. Hayek (1899-1992) was the first economist to expound the role of price in reducing the information cost for both suppliers and demanders, and in reaching equilibrium in his article “The Use of Knowledge in Society”. What he called “knowledge” is information mentioned in this book, so this article is probably the earliest study on information cost in economics, and even earlier than the concept of transaction cost put forward by Coase.