# Section 1: Transaction Cost is Indispensable

The concept of transaction cost has been mentioned as early as Lecture 3, but it has not been formally explained until now. This concept is not easy, so although it is so indispensable, it is not suitable to formally introduce it as soon as it comes up. Because transaction cost is a kind of cost, it is more appropriate to introduce it after the concept of cost has been explained. In addition, this concept should be introduced before the lecture about monopoly, because it is impossible to understand various behaviors of a monopolist without the constraint of transaction costs. That is why this lecture about transaction cost is put after that of cost and before that of market structure.

Some may think that the textbooks of MSE can only introduce the relatively simpler phenomena where there is no transaction cost. So it is a kind of step by step learning, and not a mistake. However, if the textbooks of MSE really only talks about the topics that do not involve transaction cost, there is very little to talk about. In fact, they again and again step into the field where the phenomena cannot be analyzed correctly without transaction cost.

For example, if transaction cost is not taken into account, it is impossible to explain the postulate of self-interest or rationality correctly. That one is self-interested or rational does not mean that he will not make mistakes. Under the constraint of information cost (which is a kind of transaction cost), a rational person may make a wrong choice. If transaction cost is not taken into account, it will seem that he is not rational by choosing to harm himself. That is why the MSE contradict itself by saying that self-interest or rationality is the postulate of economics and saying that there are irrational behaviors at the same time.

In addition, whether price criterion or non-price criteria should be used to determine the result of competition also depends on the constraint of transaction cost. That normative economics thinks there are inefficient behaviors stems from ignoring transaction cost. The concept of disequilibrium is also due to ignoring transaction cost. Government intervention in price (such as price control) does not result in shortage or surplus but the rise in transaction cost (rent dissipation is also a kind of transaction cost). The theory of firm can only be an engineering theory without considering transaction cost. Different forms of contract (caused by different transaction costs) lead to different structure of cost. All these topics cannot be analyzed correctly without transaction cost. Can they be excluded from the textbooks of MSE? If yes, what else is left?

The concept of transaction cost does be not easy, but it is so important to economics that is it indispensable, just as air to human. Avoiding it will only lead to many mistakes and contradictions in the textbooks of MSE.
