# Section 3: The Postulate of Self-interest Must be Followed

Since economics has postulated human to be self-interested, it can not postulate human to be un-self-interested at the same time. In other words, one can not explain human behaviours with un-self-interest, or there can not be cases of un-self-interest. It is the same as Geometry: there can not be any theories that are contradictory to the parallel axiom in Euclidean Geometry. It is also the same as laws. The constitution is the fundamental law of a nation just like postulates and axioms of science. There can not be any laws that are contradictory to the constitution, or else they must be amended or even abolished.

What would happen if economics postulated human to be both self-interested and un-self-interested at the same time? If it was the case, then economics could be able to explain any phenomena, but actually, economics had not been able to explain it all.

For instance, why does one cheat others for money: It is because he is self-interested. Moreover, why does one donate money to others? Because he is un-self-interested.

Economics seems to have explained both the behaviors, but neither has been explained. When would on earth one be self-interested, and when would he be un-self-interested? How to predict if one would cheat or donate money in advance? As mentioned before, it is the same for explaining what has happened and predicting what will happen. In practice, theories are more needed to help to predict the future. If human were postulated to be both self-interested and un-self-interested, it would be impossible to predict their behaviors and be impossible to explain when they will cheat or donate money. This scenario brings out the specific case of tautology.

However, it would also be false to answer like that: why does one cheat others of money? Is it because he is self-interested, or why does one donate money to others? Is it because he is un-self-interested?

Self-interest is a postulate which can not apply directly to explain phenomena; otherwise, the explanations with it are directly postulated. It would happen again that any phenomena could be explained, but actually, they had not been explained at all, which is also the case of tautology. This scenario shows how it is easy to make the mistakes of tautology!

It is relatively easy to explain why one chooses to cheat. As mentioned before, when committing a crime was costing less than selling bread, the baker would change his career path. The explanations for both phenomena are similar. If cheating is an easy way of getting money, and would not be caught by the police, one would tend to do so.

How about donating? If the donatee is a rich kid and he can go to school even without donations, one would not tend to donate to him. In contrast, if the donatee is a poor kid and he cannot go to school without donations, one would tend to donate to him.

Furthermore, if the poor kid has no intention of study and donations would not make him study well, one would not tend to donate to him. In contrast, if the kid has the passion and intelligence to study and just lack of money, one would tend to donate to him.

Still, furthermore, suppose there is a charity and one needs to go a few miles to donate, one would tend to do so. In contrast, if one has to drive or take a car to the backwaters thousands of miles away to donate directly, he would not take such trouble. If there is a severe charity scandal exposed, one finds out that his donations have been abused instead of helping the poor, he would not tend to donate again.[^1]

The effect of a charity scandal on donations can be used to demonstrate the methodology of science introduced in the previous lecture. Suppose there are three kinds of economics: Economics of Self-interest, Economics of Un-self-interest, and Economics of Sometimes Self-interest and Sometimes Un-self-interest. A charity scandal will be used to test which of them is scientifically valid.

According to the postulate of Economics of Self-interest, if there are scandals, then donations to charity will decline, but if they increase, then Economics of Self-interest is refuted. This situation can present a refutable condition, so it is scientific. Donations do drop dramatically after the exposure of the charity scandal, so it is scientifically true.

In contrast, according to the postulate of Economics of Un-self-interest, donations to the charity will increase due to scandals, but if they decline, Economics of Un-self-interest is refuted. It can present the refutable condition, so it is scientific. However, the donations drop after the exposure of the charity scandal, so it is a scientific fault. It is too easy to refute Economics of Un-self-interest by facts; no wonder no one has ever tried to establish such economics.

How about Economics of Sometimes Self-interest and Sometimes Un-self-interest? Can it represent the refutable condition? No way! If the donations to the charity decline, it will say because human is self-interested now; while if they increase, it will say because human is un-self-interested now. It is always true, no matter what happens. However, precisely due to its irrefutability, it is a tautology instead of a science. One may doubt if there would be such ridiculous economics. Of course, there is, but with higher-sounding names. Earlier there was a concept of "bounded rationality" that prevailed for a while, and the idea of "irrationality" has been alive until now. Besides, there is "behavioral economics" which is rather popular and hot at present. The nature of all above is Economics of Sometimes Self-interest and Sometimes Un-self-interest. There are full of such non-scientific concepts and ideas in mainstream economics; no wonder it is despised by natural scientists.

In short, although donating is a kind of philanthropy which seems to be contrary to the postulate of self-interest, in fact, it is dominated by self-interest. Self-interest means that people will try to achieve the best results with the least cost. When one wants to help others, he still wants to achieve the best result for this goal with the least cost. So it is better to donate to poor kids rather than to rich ones. It is better to donate to the hard-working kids other than to those without the intention of studying. Moreover, it costs less to distribute the donations by a reputable charity. However, if the charity is not reliable at all, it is better to send directly to the donatees by oneself. Thus, the fact that human is altruistic has not refuted the postulate of self-interest. Because even if altruism is the result one wants to achieve, he still wants to achieve it with the least cost, which means that self-interest still dominates his behaviors.

The postulate of self-interest can not directly apply to explain donating, but we can show how self-interest dominates the choices of a donator under different constraints. "Constraint" is a fundamental concept in economics, meaning the objective restriction on human's behaviors. Self-interest is also a restriction on human behaviors, but it is a postulate, needs not to be true and not an objective fact, while constraint must be.

The postulate of self-interest can not directly apply to explain human behaviors in economics. Instead, we need to point out different constraints and predict what a self-interested person will do under such constraints. This is both a prediction and an explanation. Finally, we need to investigate whether the person does do so as we predict. If he does, that means facts have tested the postulate of self-interest; otherwise, it has been refuted.

Neither can the postulate of self-interest directly apply to explain robbery or cheating. Different constraints are: one is that the police are powerful, and robbers and cheaters will be caught and punished. Under such a constraint, self-interested people will not choose to commit crimes. The other is the opposite situation, and it is more profitable to commit a crime.

In conclusion, there are different choices or behaviors of human not because human are sometimes self-interested and sometimes not, but because of different constraints. We can not apply economics to explain what has happened or predict what will happen by changing the postulate of self-interest, but investigating the change of constraints. 

- - - 

[^1]: <div>Some may argue that there is a trick with the concept of donation in the explanation. Upon donating, the question is why one chooses to donate? Rather than why one chooses to donate to a poor and hard-working kid after he had chosen to donate. <br/><br/>Indeed, there are two aspects of questions about donation. Firstly, why does one choose to donate, or why does one not keep the money for his use? Secondly, having chosen to donate, how does one choose to donate with the least costs and best result. The explanation here is the answer to the second question. The first question has been answered when it is discussed why human needs morality in the first section of this lecture. <br/><br/>More specifically, suppose there are two persons in a society, and one is poor while the other is rich. If there were no morality, the rich one would only think about himself, while the poor one would die of starvation. Then only the rich will survive, but the question is how long he could survive in competition with other animals after he is alone in the society? However, if there is morality, the rich would donate his surplus to the poor one who would not die of starvation, and thus the competition with other animals will be minimal, and a chance for survival will be higher in comparison to if he was left alone.<br/><br/>This example shows that morality is precisely the result of selfish-interest of all human beings as a whole who tries to maximize the chances of survival in competitions with other species.</div>

