# Section 1: The Causes of Interest

The theory of interest or economics of time is the theoretical foundation of finance and investment. Information cost explained in Lecture 17 is used to measure risk, except for which, the rest part of finance and investment are the implication of the theory of interest that was mainly founded by Irving Fisher (1867-1947).

One not only needs to choose different goods to consume at the same time, but also needs to choose to consume the same good at different times. In fact, the same good at different time is already a different good.

Suppose there are options: one is 100 units of grain now, and the other is 100 units of grain a year later, which will one choose? Even if there is no inflation, one will choose 100 units of grain now. Why? There are two reasons: firstly, it sounds bad, but one year later one may be dead, so the 100 units of grain have become meaningless. Only when one is alive can he enjoy any wealth, so one will think that the present value of a good is higher than the future value of it. Of course, since one may not be dead one year later, he is also willing to wait for one year if the future value increases to a certain level such as 110 units of grain one year later. The more 10 units of grain is the interest, which is the price in exchange for one’s patiently waiting for one year. It is the cause of interest from the perspective of consumption.

There is also the cause of interest from the perspective of production. If one is given 100 units of grain now, he can sow them as seeds in the field. One year later, there will be more than 100 units of grain as harvest. In other words, the value of goods will naturally increase with the passage of time, and the increasing value is interest.

In conclusion, due to the causes of consumption and production, the present value and future value of a good are different, and the difference between them is interest, while the future value divided by the present value minus 1 is Interest Rate. If one is required to give up the present goods in exchange for the future goods, he must be paid a price that is interest rate because in price theory, price refers to the relative price.
