# Section 9: Money Multiplier

The greater difficulty lies in the fact that since there is banking system in modern economy, money multiplier makes the quantity of money more and more difficult to know.

Here is a numerical example to illustrate money multiplier. A central bank prints a note of RMB100. Suppose Person 1 gets it and deposits it in Bank A, so there is an increase of RMB100 as deposit in the accounting book of Bank A. A bank must lend out the deposits to make money, but it cannot lend out all the deposits, otherwise it will have no money to return the depositors who come to withdraw money. Every day, there are people who deposit money into the bank, while there are also people who withdraw or borrow money from the bank. Based on the experience of the bank’s daily business, it can know how much money it should keep to meet the withdrawal of depositors every day.

Suppose there are 100 persons who deposit money into the bank and on average deposit RMB100 per capita, so the bank has RMB10,000 of deposits. Usually, these 100 depositors will not go to the bank to withdraw their money on the same day. Based on the experience, the bank knows that only one of them will withdraw money per day, which means it only needs to keep RMB100 to meet the withdrawal, and the rest of deposits can be lent out. The deposits kept in the bank to meet the withdrawal are called “Deposit Reserve”, and the proportion of it to the total deposits is called “Deposit-Reserve Ratio (DRR)”.

Suppose the DDR is 10%, so when Bank A has a deposit of RMB100, RMB10 will be kept as deposit reserve, and the rest of RMB90 will be able to be lent out. Suppose that RMB90 is lent to Person 2, and he deposits it in Bank B, so there is an increase of RMB90 as deposit in the accounting book in Bank B. Bank B keeps RMB9 as deposit reserve, and lends the rest of RMB81 to RMB81… This process can continue indefinitely.

Attention: bank deposit is also money! It should be easy to understand when thinking about the payment by a Debit Card. The money in a debit card is the money in the corresponding demand deposit account. Another example is the payment by check. As for the transactions between firms, most are settled through bank transfer. Therefore, not only the paper money that is in the hand is money, but also is the deposit in accounting book of bank in the form of numbers.

The money supply in a country is not only the paper money printed by the central bank, but also the deposits “created” by the commercial banks. In fact, the so-called money supply includes M0, M1 and M2 based on different statistical calibers. M0 is the money supply in narrow sense and M2 is that in broad sense. Paper money printed by the central bank is called monetary base or high-powered money, which is denoted by M0. The number in accounting book created by commercial banks through deposits and loans are called deposit money, which is denoted by M1 and M2. M1 is the sum of M0 and demand deposits, while M2 is the sum of M1 and time deposits.

Keynes believed that people like to hold cash because it has “Liquidity” which means cash is flexible as water and can become any other asset people need at any time. Of course, the disadvantage of holding cash is that it has no income like other assets (such as bank deposits, stocks, bonds, real estate, etc.), so cash is not profitable. Strictly speaking, other assets also have liquidity. For example, demand deposits can be withdrawn at any time, only a little more troublesome than cash because the depositors need to go to the banks. By contrast, time deposits cannot be withdrawn during the deposit term, or else the depositors cannot obtain the fixed interest originally agreed with the banks because they actually break the deposit contract and will be punished by only obtaining the much lower interest of demand deposit. Thus, the liquidity of it is worse than that of demand deposit.

As long as the stock market is not closed, stock-holders can sell their stocks at any time, so the flexibility in time is not worse than that of demand deposit. However, the price of stock will fluctuate, and the timing of selling out may coincide with the period when the price is falling. It is possible that the price can rebound after a while, and then it will be more favorable to sell out. But the stock-holder is eager to have cash and cannot wait, so he has to sell out the stock even when the market condition is unfavorable. He is sure to suffer a loss if the price of stock is lower than that he bought in. Even if it is higher, there may be opportunity cost as long as the price is rising, so the present price is still lower than the expected future price. By contrast, bank depositors will not suffer any loss in the principal, and will lose the interest at most if the time deposits are withdrawn in advance. However, a stock may be sold when the price is lower than that when it was bought, which means the stock-holders will suffer a loss in the principal. It is why the liquidity of stock is worse than that of bank deposit.

The liquidity of real estate is even worse because it takes quite a long time to be sold out, while there are active transactions of stocks on every working day. If an estate-owner cannot wait for a long time, he has to offer a much lower price to attract buyers as soon as possible, so he will suffer a much greater loss than the stock holder or the bank depositor.

As cash has the best liquidity, the liquidity of other assets is determined according to the convenience of cash realization (assets are turned into cash) and the degree of loss the holder will suffer in the principal and interest. The more easily an asset can be turned into cash, and the less loss the holder will suffer in the principal and interest, the better the liquidity. In fact, the lower the transaction cost of an asset that is turned into cash, the better the liquidity.

The difference between M1 and M2 precisely lies in the fact that the liquidity of demand deposit is almost the same as that of cash (paper money). Although the liquidity of time deposit is a little worse, it can be withdrawn in advance, and the loss is only limited to the interest, which means it can easily become demand deposit. It is why both M1 and M2 are regarded as money.

Because the liquidity of money is much higher than other assets, the term “liquidity” is usually used as another name for money. For example, the sentences such as “the central bank releases/returns liquidity” often appear in financial reports, which means the central bank increases/decreases the money supply. Strictly speaking, liquidity is only the nature of money, not money itself, and all assets have a certain degree of liquidity, which is not unique to money.

Back to the above numerical example, with the first deposit, the deposit money created by Bank A is RMB100. With the second deposit, the deposit money created by Bank B is RMB90. With the third deposit, the deposit money created by Bank C is RMB81… and so on. Arranging these numbers together, there is an infinite diminishing geometric progression: 100, 90, 81 ..., and each value is 90% of the previous value. According to the summation formula $\frac{a_1}{1 - q}$, the total amount of deposit money created by the banking system is $\frac{100}{1-90\%}$ or 1000. To generalize this formula, it is $\frac{M_0}{R}$ (R is the DRR). $\frac{1}{R}$ is the money multiplier because it reflects how many times of deposit money is created by commercial banks from the monetary base issued by the central bank.

Thus, the money supply in a country is almost the deposit money created by commercial banks, and the paper money printed by the central bank accounts for only a small part, even a fraction, if R is very small and the money multiplier is very large. Of course, the central bank can still directly or indirectly control the money supply by directly controlling the monetary base and affecting the money multiplier through changing R. In all countries, there are regulations on “legal deposit reserve ratio”, so commercial banks cannot keep as many deposits as reserves as they will.
