# Section 3: The Cause of Inflation

It is said that financial crisis is caused by the disconnection between the fictitious economy and the real economy. It sounds very profound, but in fact it is logically the same as disconnection between the value of money and that of the goods. How can that happen? It is precisely the problem studied by monetary theory.

As mentioned in previous section, the value of money derives from the goods it exchanges for. For example, suppose there are 100 units of goods in a nation, and the government has issued 100 units of money. In other words, there are 100 units of money in this nation to buy 100 units of goods, so the average price of a good is 100／100＝1, which is called price level, not the specific price of a certain good, but the average price of all goods as a whole. Thus, the money with a face value of 1 can, on average, buy 1 unit of good. The value of 1 unit of money derives from the value of 1 unit of good.

Suppose the 100 units of goods in the above nation have not changed, but the government prints 100 units more of money, which means there are now 200 units of money in the nation. There are now 200 units of money to buy goods that are still 100 units, so the average price of a good is  200／100＝2, which means the price level has risen. It is precisely inflation! The cause of inflation is so simple. It is the quantity of money is out of line with that of real goods that causes the price level to rise. It is also the essence of the cause of all economic or financial crises: the disconnection between the fictitious economy and the real economy. Now, the value of 1 unit of money drops to 1／2 unit of goods. In other words, the value of money is the purchasing power of it.

Since the value of money actually derives from goods, if the quantity of goods does not increase, neither should the quantity of money increase. Money cannot appreciate by increasing itself, but just depreciates. In other words, internal inflation is the same as external currency devaluation, and both are the decline in the value of money. Internally money is exchanged with domestic goods, while externally money is exchanged directly with foreign currency but indirectly with foreign goods because foreign currency is exchanged with foreign goods.[^1] If the value of foreign currency remains unchanged, but the purchasing power of domestic currency declines, it is clear that domestic currency will depreciate relative to the foreign currency.

This truth is easy to understand with common sense. If money itself were valuable and did not depend on the goods it exchanges for, a nation’s wealth would be easily increase by just printing more money, and would not need to work hard for production, and all factories and shops could be shut down. How could it be true?

Therefore, in order to stabilize the value of money, the quantity of it must change along with the quantity of goods. For example, if the goods increase by 10%, from the original 100 units to 110 units, the money can also increase from 100 units to 110 units, no more, no less. If it increases more than the goods, there will be inflation. If it increases less than the goods, there will be deflation.

- - - -

[^1]: Attention: this conclusion is based on the premise that the value of foreign currency remains unchanged.