# Section 5: The Harm of Inflation and Deflation

As we all know, inflation and deflation is bad. But why? In this section, it will be explained with economics.

As mentioned in section 1, one of the functions of money is the ruler of value. Since it is a ruler, the length of it should not change. Just imagine if an engineer uses a ruler to measure the length of an object, one meter today is so long, but tomorrow it will change, while the real length of the object has not changed, how can the engineer use such an frequently changing ruler to build a house? Logically similarly, if money, as the ruler of value of goods, always changes, while the real value of a good does not change, how can a producer or consumer make correct decisions?

As has explained in Lecture 6, the cause of the Great Depression in the United States is that the Federal Reserve injected too much money into the economy in the 1920s, resulting in inflation that misled people to make wrong production and consumption decisions. In other words, in a world where the value of money is unstable, the change in the observable monetary price is mixed with inflation. People should only respond to the change in supply and demand, but they cannot tell whether there is inflation, so their decisions are more or less wrong. It is precisely the cause of economic instability (economic fluctuation or business cycle): the fictitious economy (such as money) is out of line with the real economy, which is not market failure at all. When the disconnection is very serious, there will be economic crisis, usually preceded by stock market crash, currency crisis (sharp devaluation of the money value), financial crisis, etc.

The previous statement that the value of money derives from that of goods is actually the viewpoint of classical economics. Classical economists think money is only a veil covered on the goods. An increase in the quantity of money will not lead to an increase in the total value of money in the economy, but a decrease in the value of each unit of money, thus causing an increase in the nominal price (monetary price) of goods, or inflation. The real price of goods is relative price and will not change because the supply-demand relationship reflected by it has not changed, so the change in the quantity of money has no impact on the real economy. It is called “monetary neutrality”.

However, after the GD in the US, Keynes put forward the opposite view. He advocates that money is not neutral, which means the change in the quantity of money has an impact on the real economy. He believes that government can regulate the economy through monetary policy: increasing the money supply during the depression and creating inflation to promote economic growth, and vice versa.

Classical economists are right about the value of money. However, Keynes’s proposition is more reasonable about whether the money is neutral, but his explanation is wrong. The correct explanation is that the theory of supply and demand is based on the premise that there is no money (or money is neutral). In a world without money, people make decisions according to the real price (relative price). In a world with money, because the information cost of monetary price (nominal price) is much lower than that of real price, people actually make decisions based on monetary price, and there may be “money illusion”. When monetary price is actually out of line with relative price, people will be misled by it to make wrong decisions, just as illuded by money. It is somewhat similar to the case mentioned in Lecture 11: it is opportunity cost instead of historical cost that determines people’s behaviors. However, when the information cost is high, people will estimate the opportunity cost with the historical cost because the information cost of latter is lower, but at the cost of the increasing risk of making mistakes.

Because people make decisions based on monetary price, when it is out of line with real price due to wrong monetary policy, people will be misled by money illusion to make wrong decisions. For example, producers find the (monetary) price of their products rise, not knowing that it is only due to inflation, so they think their products are popular in the market and expand production. As producers expand production, the goods (national income or social wealth) in the real economy have really increased. In other words, the classical economists’ view that money is neutral and will not affect the real economy ignores that there is information cost (transaction cost) in a world with money. However, illusion is illusion, and sooner or later people will be disillusioned. Keynes wants to make use of money illusion to achieve the purpose of promoting economic growth by government intervention (increasing money supply to create inflation) in the economy, which is not only effective in the short run[^1] , but will also eventually result in bitter consequences. The disconnection between monetary economy and real economy to a certain extent will inevitably lead to economic crisis, just as those who wrongly estimate opportunity cost with historical cost will sooner or later face the consequences of losses.

The increase in production due to money illusion will eventually turn into overproduction because producers will drastically shrink production when they are disillusioned, which leads to economic fluctuations. The so-called “Business Cycle” is not caused by the contradiction between socialized mass production and private ownership as Marx thought, nor by the free operation of market that will lead to the total demand less than the total supply as Keynes thought, but by the government’s wrong policies, one of which is precisely wrong monetary policy that misleads people by the “noise” of inflation. The other wrong policies include the “evil laws” such as trade unions, minimum wage law, social welfare and trade protectionism which all infringe PPRs and undermine or even simply abolish the price criteria (market mechanism).

The above is to explain how inflation weakens and loses the function of money as a ruler of value, and even misleads economic entities to make wrong decisions. In addition, inflation is the devaluation of money, which harms those with fixed income. Inflation also discourages people’s enthusiasm for savings, because if RMB100 this year is saved, the principal and interest next year may not buy what is worth RMB100 this year, and then why will people choose to save instead of consume immediately? As mentioned in section 1, one of the functions of money is a store of value, because money is not perishable like such goods as bread. However, it only means that the physical form of money will not perish, but the value form may decrease due to inflation. If there is inflation of 100%, which means RMB1 now will be only worth RMB0.5 in the future, what is the difference with that half piece of bread will perish tomorrow and the value (price) of it falling from RMB1to RMB0.5? That goods perish is devaluation, which is essentially the same with money devaluation due to inflation. In a word, not only the function of money as a ruler of value but also that of money as a store of value will be greatly undermined by inflation.

In such an extreme case as super-inflation (the inflation rate is over 100%), the prices are soaring, and may be different in the morning and in the afternoon of the same day. Thus, the function of money as a store of value will entirely lose, and people will exchange the money for goods as soon as they get it.

The last time China experienced such super-inflation was before liberation (1949) when the Kuomintang Party (KMT) issued a new currency called “gold yuan” note. The national government (controlled by KMT) demanded people to exchange gold and silver for this currency, and that was why the new currency was called “gold yuan” note.[^2]

“Gold yuan” notes were issued on August 19, 1948, with a legal gold content of 0.22217 li (a Chinese unit of weight that is equal to 0.05 grams). After the issuance of “gold yuan” notes, people are prohibited from possessing gold, silver and foreign exchange which must be changed into “gold yuan” notes before September 30 of that year, or else will be confiscated. At the very beginning, the national government’s central bank announced to plan to issue 2 billion “gold yuan” notes. However, by the end of 1948, the issuance of “gold yuan” notes had been more than 8.1 billion, and rise to 5 trillion in April 1949 and 130 trillion in June 1949. The consequence is naturally soaring prices. In May 1949, the price of a dan (a Chinese unit of dry measure for grain that is equal to 60 kilograms) of rice was over 400 million “gold yuan” notes. The face value of the “gold yuan” note keeps setting new records: at first, the largest face value was 1000, and then 10000, 100000, 500000, 1 million and even 5 million! Even with such high face value, it still needs a large bundle or even a big bag of money to buy rice because the price of rice had risen to 400 million “gold yuan” notes.

In June 1949, after successively occupying Nanjing and Shanghai, the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) announced to stop the circulation of “gold yuan” notes by exchanging them at a rate of 100,000 to 1 for RMB. A large number of people’s savings vanished overnight! My mother told me the story of my grandmother when I was a child: The total amounts of money she had worked all her life to save was not enough for 100,000 “gold yuan” notes, so she could not even exchange them for RMB1. She could only be crying while burning all the “gold yuan” notes to make them play their final values as paper. From then on, she never believed in any paper money! Any time my parents gave her money, she immediately spent them all. She also left us such a “famous saying”, “Eat up, use up, and keep healthy!”

These histories written in blood and tears teach us that inflation (especially super-inflation) is a serious blow to savings. Investments come from savings. Without savings, how can there be investments? Without investments, how can there be productions? Without productions, how can the demand of consumption be met, let alone economic growth? In fact, in the developing countries in South America and Africa, the rate of savings is not as high as that in East Asia. The usual explanation is that people of East Asia like to save because of the influence of traditional Chinese ideas. However, this explanation based on the unobservable ideas is irrefutable, so it is not scientific. The scientific explanation is that the inflation rate in South American and African countries is usually much higher than that in East Asian countries, which of course greatly weakens people’s enthusiasm for saving.

It can be observed in the history of “gold yuan” note that even the currency like “gold yuan” note is accepted by people, but is just exchanged quickly for goods. It means that even in the period of super-inflation, the two major functions of money as a ruler and a store of value have lost, but the function as a medium of exchange still plays a role, because it can decrease the transaction cost of barter so much that people would rather accept the rapidly depreciated money than barter. However, if “gold yuan” note had continued to depreciate, there would be a day when it was rejected completely, and then the function of money as a medium of exchange would be also lost. Without money to facilitate the transactions, the trouble (transaction cost) will increase greatly. In modern society, producers do not produce for their own consumption, but to sell their products to consumers. If transaction cost is so high that transactions greatly decrease, so will the production do. Without productions, how can there be economic growth?

It is precisely why the stability of monetary value is so important! Without the stability of monetary value, the market’s function of automatically adjusting the behaviors of various economic entities with price will be lost, while the three major functions of money (a medium of exchange, a store of value and a ruler of value) will also be lost one after another, resulting in increase in transaction cost. The end may be economic crisis, and even the collapse of the political regime!

Monetary system is an institution. As pointed out in Lecture 14, all kinds of institutions of human are created to reduce transaction cost, but inevitably they also bring about an increase in transaction cost in some respects. The three major functions of money are precisely the positive effects of monetary system in reducing transaction cost, while the instability of monetary value is the negative effect of it in increasing transaction cost. In order to make the monetary system play a positive role as much as possible with as little as possible negative effect, the stability of the monetary value that means the quantity of money should change along with that of the quantity of goods becomes the core issue to a monetary system. In other words, the monetary neutrality advocated by classical economics should be understood not as an equilibrium that can be reached naturally, but as a desirable goal of monetary policy of government (central bank).

- - - -

[^1]: Of course, Keynes has a famous saying, “In the long run, we will all die.”

[^2]: The term “yuan” is the most common monetary unit in China, meaning “dollar”.