# Section 4: The History of Money

There was rarely inflation in ancient times, but it has become so common in modern economy. Why? As mentioned in the previous section, the cause of inflation is the disconnection between the quantity of money and that of goods. So the answer must be that this disconnection is rather common in modern economy.

But why is the quantity of money easily out of line with that of goods in modern economy? There are three reasons.

(1) In ancient times, money is precious metals such as gold or silver, while in modern economy, money is paper money. The quantity of precious metals will not easily increase, while paper money can be easily printed by the government.
In fact, there were inflations or even super-inflations in ancient times. The following is a brief history of money.

Marx had said, “Gold and silver are not money in nature, but money is gold and silver naturally.” Indeed, in the very early days of mankind, money was not precious metals such as gold or silver, but salt and rare shells had been used as money.

According to the functions of money, if only as a medium of exchange, any kind of goods can be money. However, if as a store and a ruler of value, precious metals are the most suitable goods. In order to store value, money itself cannot be perishable or easily broken, resulting in loss of value. Salt and shells are not perishable, but shells are easily broken. Gold is the most chemically stable, which means it is the most difficult to start chemical reactions. For example gold will remain unchanged when burning at high temperature, and will not be eroded by strong acid or alkali. In fact, rot means chemical reactions have changed the original material with higher value into another one with little or even no value.

What is more, if as a ruler of value, the quantity of money cannot increase too easily, or else it will exceed the increase in the quantity of goods, causing inflation. That is why when shells are used as money, they must be rare ones. Gold is also quite suitable in this respect. In fact, the quantity of gold in ancient China was so few that it is silver other than gold that was the main money.

Gold also has the advantage that it is stable chemically, but it is so soft physically that it can be bitten by teeth, which is convenient to cut up gold into small parts for the small transactions. It is why diamond, which is also imperishable and rare but too hard, fails to become money.

Thus, gold and silver (especially gold) are really, as Marx said, born to be money. If as an ordinary good, gold is actually the most useless. It is too stable chemically to be changed into more useful materials through chemical reactions. By contrast, silver will turn into silver sulfide which is black when exposed to sulfides, which is why in ancient times, silver was often made as food vessel to track toxicity. And gold is so soft physically that it cannot be as widely used as iron and steel. Except as money, gold is good for nothing!

Although precious metals were mainly used as money in ancient times, but they were too rare and of too high value for small transactions in daily life, there are also coins of base metals (such as copper, iron and nickel). These coins have face values stipulated by government, and there will be inflation or deflation if the face values are out of line with the contents of the base metals and the price ratio with precious metals. In ancient China, there had been a monetary idea of “the match of mother and children”, which meant that the money of precious metal was like the mother, while the coins of base metal were like the children. The par value of them must be in line with their respective content and price ratio. However, some ancient governments still set the face values of the coins regardless of it, which in fact created inflation by reducing the contents of coins or inflating the face values to increase the money supply. The following are two such examples in history.

One is “Qianyuan Treasures” in Tang Dynasty in ancient China. Qianyuan was the name of years during which an emperor in Tang Dynasty. He faced a fiscal crisis caused by huge military expenditures. He was suggested to create inflation by issuing a new currency historically called “Qianyuan Treasures”. Here “treasures” refer to a kind of coins much heavier. Although the coin was very heavy, but in fact the contents of it were not worth the face values. For example, one “Qianyuan Treasure” weighed 5.97g, and was stipulated to be equal to 10 “Kaiyuan Tongbao” that was the old currency and weighed 3.98g. Obviously, according to the relative weight, one “Qianyuan Treasure” should be only equal to about 1.5 “Kaiyuan Tongbao”, but the government set the ratio to be 10 times. No wonder the emperor openly declared this issuance of new currency had made the national treasury full and gotten 10 times of profits. Only a year later, he issued another new currency with the weight of 11.94g that was 3 times of “Kaiyuan Tongbao” in weight but 50 times in face value. According to official records, the direct consequence of such crazy issuances of heavy coins is nothing but inflation. The price of grain was soaring, and there were a lot of people who were starved to death along the roads.

The other is the reform of remonetization by Shigehide Ogiwara of Japanese Shogunate. The fifth General of Shogunate also faced a fiscal crisis caused by the profligacy of the previous two generals. Shigehide Ogiwara, the chief treasurer of Shogunate solved this problem by a reform of remonetization which meant retrieving the coins in circulation and reminting. For example, the most widely circulated in the market at that time was “Keicho koban”, and after remonetization the weight of it remained the same, but the content of gold decreased from 85.69% to 57.37%. Silver coins were also reminted. For example, the content of silver in “Keicho chogin” decreased from 80% to 64%. At the very beginning, this remonetizaion did greatly increase the fiscal income of Shogunate. But as a large number of depreciated currencies flowed into the market, it caused serious inflation and discredited the Shogunate.

According to the lessons of Chinese history, the basic pattern of the collapse of most imperial dynasties is like that: the first stage is fiscal crisis caused by profligacy or militarism. To solve the fiscal crisis, the appropriate means should be to increase income and reduce expenditure. However, it is almost impossible for an emperor who has been accustomed to spending lavishly to reduce expenditure. And the increase in tax is only convenient for corrupt officials to deprive people’s wealth, so most of the increase in tax just flows into private pockets instead of national treasury. If the tax is continually increased, people cannot afford and may rise in revolt. The right path is not easy to follow, so the government will be tempted to follow the devious way of creating inflation which can easily increase fiscal incomes at the very beginning, while the evil consequence will emerge later, just as a Chinese saying “Quench a thirst with poison”. The ancients did not know the monetary theory, so inflation was easily out of control once created, and quickly worsened to be super-inflation, seriously damaging the economy. It is the second stage. At this time, as long as there happens natural disaster, such as flood or drought, hitting the ancient pillar industry of agriculture, and the officials who are responsible for relief seize the opportunity to make a fortune, there must be uprising, which is the third stage. Thus, the trilogy of fiscal crisis, inflation and natural or man-made disasters that cause uprising had played the funeral symphony of most dynasties in ancient China.

In ancient times, because it was necessary to issue or remint a large number of metal money to artificially create inflation, it was much more troublesome to do so. If it were not for the imminent fiscal crisis, and it were difficult to increase income and reduce expenditure by right means, government would seldom do so. By contrast, in modern society, government can easily print paper money with face value much higher than the value of paper as a good. Under the guidance of monetary theory, as long as government does not go too far, there will not be super-inflation, so the public will only complain and withstand it. No wonder the so-called “moderate” inflation below 10% will become a common phenomenon. However, as mentioned in Lecture 18, compound interest is destructive, so even if the annual inflation rate is not very high, it is still a terrible killer for long-term investments (savings).

(2) Keynes’s theory advocates that government should use monetary policy to create inflation to deal with economic depression, which provides a seemingly “scientific” excuse to increase the quantity of money out of line with that of the real economy. By contrast, in ancient times, although government did not know monetary theory, neither did it think to intervene in the market with monetary policy to promote economic growth.

(3) In most modern western or developed nations, there are trade unions and welfare systems that interfere with the market and make the economy lack of the flexibility to adapt to changes, such as the wage rigidity. By inflation, it is possible to temporarily adjust (real) price (wage) and increase flexibility, thus promoting economic growth.

Even Friedman, the leading figure in the monetary school, thinks that moderate inflation is a “lubricant” for the economy, which is actually a compromise policy proposal based on the constraint of the lack of flexibility in the economic system. Inflation has no function of lubricant in essence. It will be explained in detail in the following Lecture 20.
