# Section 1: From Classical Economics to Neoclassical Economics

Adam Smith’s “Wealth of Nations”, published in 1776, marks that economics has become an independent discipline. From then on to today, economics has gone through two stages: classical economics and neoclassical economics. Until today, it is still in the neoclassical period. In addition to Smith, the famous classical economists include David Ricardo (1772-1823), John Stuart Mill (1806-1873), etc. Alfred Marshall (1842-1924) published “The Principles of Economics” in 1890, which marked the transition from classical economics to neoclassical economics, so he is the second greatest master only next to Smith in economics. His “Principles of Economics” is regarded as the first textbook in economics, and today’s economics textbooks all follow it in the structure. The masterpieces of classical economics such as Smith’s “Wealth of Nations”, Ricardo’s “On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation” and Mill’s “Principles of Political Economics” are obviously different from the current economics textbooks which are quite similar to Marshall’s “Principles of Economics”.

There were no terms of micro and macro in classical economics, but there were the concepts of them which were very different from those in neoclassical economics. In classical economics, there are two fields of study: resource allocation and income distribution. The former could be regarded as micro and the latter to be macro.

Classical economics focuses on analyzing how the market mechanism (price criterion) guides the allocation of resources for production, and how the income from the sales of products is distributed to the owners of the resources. Classical economists advocated the free market and believed that government only needed to play the role of “a night watchman”. There are two duties for a night watchman: one is to tell the time, the other is to patrol for fire prevention and security. In other words, in the view of classical economists, the role of government was minimal, and it should not interfere in the market. The spontaneous working of the market was enough to arrange all kinds of economic activities in a society correctly.

Even transmitting to neoclassical economics, economists were still of this opinion about the free market, and only introduced mathematics (mainly geometry) to present and deduce economic theories. Economists had long believed in the market.
