# Section 5: More Truths about the Great Depression

The cause of the Great Depression explained by Friedman’s “A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960” has been expounded in the previous section. However, this terrible story had more tragic developments, because Friedman only explained the phenomena of overproduction and severe deflation, but did not explain why there had been such a high unemployment rate for ten years. The authorities of the US, not just the Fed, had made a series of serious mistakes, which coincidently joint together to cause such an unprecedented GD.

The first big blunder was that the US Congress had just approved business income tax which was vehemently opposed by the traditional economists because it was suspected as double taxation. The profits distributed to the corporate owners after the business income tax would be taxed again by the personal income tax. Here we would not discuss if the business income tax was true or false, but point out that it was equivalent to tax increase. Even Keynesian economics would suggest that in an economic recession government should stimulate the growth of the economy with a tax cut. However, the US Congress at that time increased instead of a decreased tax, which of course further aggravated the shutdown of enterprises, thus increasing unemployment.

The second big blunder was that the US Congress was so foolish to approve the infamous Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act in 1930 to substantially raise import duties despite strong oppositions from other countries. Different from the US today, it had trade surplus at that time, how stupid it is to embrace protectionism with such “favorable” trade balance! It was easy to guess what would other countries respond. Yes, they retaliated by also raising the tariffs on the exports of US. As a result, the tariff war broke out, and the international trade plummeted to only one-third of the original value within one year. The hard-hit exports naturally could not help the US economy to get rid of the GD as the Tariff Act had expected, but just made it worsen on the contrary.

The third big blunder was the biggest one, whose influence was much worse than the mistakes made by the Fed and the US Congress. It was the minimum wage, trade unions and other institutions that hinder the wage reductions, which led to high unemployment for ten years. Even with chaotic monetary policies which caused severe deflation, and domestic and foreign tax increase, there would not be large-scale and long-term unemployment so long as prices (wages) in the labor market could be flexibly adjusted downward.

Firstly, the minimum wage, trade unions and other similar institutions nullify the essential role of the (labor) market in equalizing the supply and the demand by adjusting the prices (wages).  In the economic recession, the productions shrink, so the demand for labor decreases. The market is supposed to equalize the supply and the demand by adjusting the price downward. However, if the equilibrium wage which can equalize the supply and the demand in labor market to eliminate unemployment is lower than that stipulated by minimum wage, the market’s adjustment function will, of course, fail to work. If the supply of products exceeds the demand, they cannot be sold; if the supply of labor exceeds the demand, they cannot be sold either, which is precisely unemployment. Is it the market’s fault, or the government’s? Who forbids the market’s adjustment function to work? Who causes the labor market to be disequilibrium with oversupply? Who forces those who may be willing to sell their labor at a price lower than the minimum wage to become unemployed without any income?

Secondly, the profits of enterprises do be reduced by the price fall in the product market (deflation) and tax increase, which have pushed many enterprises to the edge of a shutdown. However, if the labor cost can be reduced along with the profits reduce, the burden of the enterprises can always be lightened to some extent, thus saving some of them to survive. The survival of enterprises is the most reliable guarantee for the employment of labor.

Reviewing the truth of the GD, one can only sigh and conclude that how wrong traditional economics (and economists) are! However, the most seriously wrong is not the market! The market has done nothing wrong. It is human who distorts the price signals with wrong monetary policies. It is also human who with minimum wage law, trade unions and other similar institutions nullify the market’s adjustment function of equalizing the supply and the demand. However, again it is human (such as Keynes) who blame the failure on the market, claiming that if the market is allowed to operate freely, it will cause insufficient aggregate demand, overproduction, high unemployment etc. So the government needs to be like a hero in an economic crisis, standing up to correct market’s errors. It is similar to that someone buys a machine and does not follow the instructions of the manual to mishandle it, causing such a severe problem that others are hurt or even killed, but he blames the machine for having design defects!

Well, the market is not a person, so it can not stand up to defend itself against human’s slander and false accusation. It does not matter, because it is the economic rule that is the final judger. One can wrong the market, but he cannot escape the punishment of economic rule, just as one is sure to fall from the sky and lose his life if he does not follow Newton’s laws. As the history of Keynesian economics mentioned in section 2, only 30 years later, the punishment of economic rule had come.

Until nowadays, there have been such punishments in various countries around the world. The specific plots of tragedies may be different, but there is no fundamental difference in essence. The latest ones are the financial turmoil in the US in 2008 and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe in 2009.

Human should keep his eyes open to see the truth clearly: it is human, not the market, who has been torturing himself!
