# Section 6: The Crowding-out Effect of Government Expenditure

Even if government really believes in Keynes and strictly follows his recommendations to increase tax and reduce expenditure during economic prosperity to have fiscal surplus covering the fiscal deficit during economic recession, according to Friedman’s permanent-income hypothesis, it means that government expenditure is a temporary expenditure that has nothing to do with permanent income and consumption and may not increase current income and consumption. Thus, the link of multiplier effect is interrupted.

For example, Keynes has advocated that during the Great Depression, it was good for government to employ labor to bury and then dig out bottles repeatedly, which could boost national income. However, when people expected government to employ them only temporarily and then they would be unemployed again, they would not dare to increase consumption, but would save the (temporary) income against the risk of future unemployment. As has been analyzed in Section 2, it is actually not saving but consumption on insurance that is not helpful to increasing future output.

Unless government established a state-owned enterprise to employ them, so that they would expect to work in it in the future and regard it as permanent income, then they would increase permanent consumption.

However, if government did so, the society would have become a planned economy. In the era of planned economy, there did be not economic cycle in China, but there was permanent recession causing poverty and the national economy to be on the verge of collapse, which is the result of a huge increase in transaction cost caused by the infringement on PPRs. It proves that the rise in the proportion of transaction cost to social wealth is precisely the cause of economic recession.

Besides, many economists who criticized Keynes’s theory of multiplier have pointed out that the increase in government expenditure would have “Crowding-out Effect” on private consumption and investment expenditures. If government spends on purchasing consumption goods, there will be less supply in the product market causing a rise in price that hit private consumption. As a result, consumption expenditure will decrease, which will also lead to several times of decrease in national income due to multiplier effect. If government spends on public investment, there will be less supply in the factor market causing a rise in factor price (especially the interest rate) that hit private investment. As a result, investment expenditure will decrease, which will also lead to several times of decrease in national income due to multiplier effect.

However, Keynes would argue that the prerequisite of his theory of national income determination is that there is economic recession, which means many resources are idle, so supply can increase at constant price. The question is: what is the state of “in idle”? It is logically similar to the question “What is unemployment?” In Keynes's view, for the unemployed, his labor is idle. If government hired the unemployed to bury and then dig out bottles, the enterprises would not have to increase wage to attract the labor, so there would be no increase in cost, neither would they decrease production and investment expenditure.

His argument seems plausible, but as the causes of unemployment has been explained in Lecture 20, readers should understand what mistakes Keynes has made. One is unemployed because his wage is too high, which means his contribution to production (the value he creates) is not enough to make up for his cost (wage). Government does not calculate cost and benefit as carefully as an enterprise because it spends taxpayers’ money, and employs this labor with a high wage, which cannot change the fact that the value created by him is less than the cost of his wage. In other words, the production that government employed this labor to engage in suffers a loss.

Similar analysis can be analogized to other idle production factors (resources). Although there are no evil polices such as minimum wage law imposed on most production factors, it is still possible that the prices of them cannot fall to the equilibrium price due to transaction cost, so that they are idle. If a resource is idle, the only direct reason is the cost of using it is higher than the benefit. The enterprises refuse to use the idle resource, but government does, which cannot change the fact that the value created by it is less than the cost of it, so it is definitely a business at a loss.

For an economy, it is by no means the more production, the better, but the more production with added value, the better. A production at a loss means consuming higher-value resources to produce lower-value products, which can only lead to negative growth of wealth. There do be some cases where the efficiency of government is higher than that of enterprises. However, since the relevant production have always been engaged in by enterprises, the efficiency of enterprises in such productions should be higher than that of government, otherwise the market economy should give way to the planned economy. The key question is: will the change in constraints of economic recession suddenly increase the efficiency of government in using these resources even higher than that of enterprises? Obviously NO!

It is logically similar to the consumption expenditure in the product market. If consumers are unwilling to buy a good, they must think that the use value of it is not worth its price. Can government change the fact that the use value of this good is not worth its price by buying it? Of course NO!

Thus, it is impossible that when there is economic recession government takes the place of individuals and enterprises to increase consumption and investment, which can increase economic growth rate. In fact, it just increases businesses at a loss that decrease social wealth.

The above is a complete criticism of Keynes’s theory of national income determination.

Based on Keynes’s theory, Keynesian school that is different from Keynes and is in fact not agreed by Keynes later developed IS-LM model. “IS” refers to the equilibrium condition of the product market (I＝S), while “LM” refers to the equilibrium condition of the monetary market (L＝M or money demand＝money supply). Keynes’s theory of national income determination regards investment (I) as the independent decision of enterprise, so it is a constant. Keynesian school regards “I” as a function of interest rate (r), so interest rate will affect national income through investment. And interest rate is also affected by the monetary market, and national income will affect money demand, thus affecting interest rate. In order to solve the problem that national income and interest rate affect each other, Keynesian school came up with this IS-LM model to solve simultaneous equilibrium condition of the product market and the monetary market. Keynes refers fiscal policy to a tool to move the curve of IS, while monetary policy to move the curve of LM.

The equilibrium condition of I＝S has been thoroughly criticized in Section 2. As has been criticized in Lecture 19, if monetary policy is used to adjust the economy, it will only cause economic fluctuation (business cycle), so this IS-LM model is also completely wrong.

As for the analysis of aggregate demand and aggregate supply that is deduced from the theory of national income determination, of course it is also wrong, and it is unnecessary to waste time in introducing and learning it.

It is necessary to discuss the “Say’s Law” that was an orthodox theory in economics before the Great Depression and the popularity of Keynes’s theory. Say’s Law says, “Supply will automatically create demand equal to it. An enterprise has paid to the upstream suppliers of raw materials or intermediate products and to the workers before production. According to the theory of income distribution introduced in Lecture 20, the owners of these production factors will divide up all the income from the sale of the products. In other words, the purchasing power (demand) generated by the income of the owners of the production factors can definitely buy out all the products (supplies) in the market. Therefore, according to Say’s law, it is impossible that there will be overproduction that aggregate demand is less than supply.

The GD seemed to have refuted this law that was once regarded as a golden rule in economics, so it is no longer introduced or even mentioned in economics textbooks nowadays, and few economics students have heard of it. However, according to the introductions and analyses of this lecture and the previous lectures about the GD and monetary theory, economic recession is not necessarily due to overproduction, but may be due to the rise in consumption that is not help to increasing future output. And even if there is overproduction, the real cause is wrong monetary policy.

There do be mistakes in Say’s law, but it is just wrong in ignoring the non-neutral effect on the economy when the monetary value is unstable, which is the mistake of classical economics, and in ignoring the transaction cost, which is the mistake of neo-classical economics.
