# Section 5: The Pandora’s Box of Fiscal Deficit

There are still more mistakes in the policy recommendations deduced from the wrong Keynes’s theory of national income determination. In the previous sections, only the simplest model of two-sector economy, where there is no government, is analyzed. If extended to the model of three-sector economy, there will be government, so Keynes’s theory has opened a terrible Pandora’s Box by advocating increasing government expenditure to stimulate economic growth!

According to his wrong theory of multiplier, Keynes believes that government expenditure is similar to consumption and investment, which means an increase in government expenditure can bring about several times of increase in national income. Consumption and investment are both private decisions, and government just can encourage individuals and firms to increase expenditure, so the effect is uncontrollable. By the contrast, government has full decision right on government expenditure.

Keynes even advocated during the Great Depression that government should hire a group of labor to bury bottles in the ground, then dig them out, and bury them again ... Such meaningless work could be good to economy because it would make the employed labor have income that would be spent, so the sellers of the consumed goods would have income and increase consumption that would increase the income of another sellers ... Such cycle continues, so national income of the whole economy will increase by several times in the end. Obviously, it is logically similar to the proposal in section 3 of bombing out buildings, rebuilding them and then bombing out again ..., so it is similarly ridiculous.

Is government really so foolish to believe such an absurd policy recommendation? Of course not! If one believes government really believes in Keynes, it is he who is foolish! Do not forget that government spends the taxpayers’ money instead of its own to increase government expenditure! In fact, government had long been eager to spend freely, but it had been constrained by the prudent fiscal discipline of “keep expenditures within the limits of income” advocated by classical economics which also believed that a small government should not interfere with the market. Well, now there is a guy named Keynes who announces that increasing government expenditure is good to stimulating economic growth! For such a so-called “scientific theory”, it is no wonder that government thanks Keynes much and seems to believe in him as a god.

Wait a minute! The money spent by government comes from taxpayers. According to Keynes’s theory of multiplier, although the increase in government expenditure can lead to several times of increase in national income, but the increase in tax will also lead to several times of DECREASE in national income, so the net effect on national income will depend on which multiplier is larger. And according to Keynes’s theory of national income determination, in the case of three-sector economy, y＝c＋i＋g, where consumption function is c＝a＋by', and y’ is “disposable income”, the definition formula of which is y’＝y－t (t is tax). Thus, the government expenditure multiplier can be calculated to be $\frac{1}{1 - b}$, where “b” is MPC, while the tax multiplier is $-\frac{b}{1 - b}$ that is negative, which means the increase in tax will lead to the decrease in national income. In other words, if government increases tax to increase expenditure, the multiplier effect will be nullified because the sum of government expenditure multiplier and the tax multiplier is precisely $\frac{1}{1 - b} - \frac{b}{1 - b} = 1$

However, Keynes points out that the reason is that classical economics requires government to keep expenditures within the limits of income and allow no fiscal deficit (also known as “budget deficit”). If government is allowed to have fiscal deficit, which means the expenditure can be more than income, government can increase expenditure without increasing tax revenue, or even cut tax to reversely use the effect on national income of the tax multiplier to further simulate economic growth.

The question is: how can government spend more than the income? If one spends more than his income, he can borrow money to make up the gap. Similarly, if government has fiscal deficit, it can also borrow money, which is the issuance of treasury bonds. The money borrowed has to be repaid, and one should work hard to earn more future income to repay the debt, but what about government? The income of government comes from tax, so treasury bonds are repaid with future tax, unless government quietly prints more money to repay the debts, which will cause inflation or even hyperinflation. In other words, if government does not engage in inflation, the multiplier effect of tax on decreasing national income is just postponed if government increases expenditure by borrowing instead of increasing tax, which has not fundamentally eliminated the offset of the multiplier effect of tax on that of expenditure.

However, Keynes still thinks it does not matter. When there is economic recession, government should increase expenditure and cut tax to stimulate economic growth with budget deficit. And when there is economic prosperity, government can collect more taxes and spend less, so there will be fiscal surplus (budget surplus) that covers the deficit before. Classical economics is wrong to require government to keep budget balance every year. The correct approach should be to keep budget balance within an economic cycle.

This is precisely “fiscal policy”. Together with the “monetary policy” mentioned in Lecture 19, it is one of the Keynes’s two major policy tools in regulating the economy. Expansionary fiscal policy and expansionary monetary policy are used to stimulate economic growth during economic recession, while tight fiscal policy and tight-money policy are used to cool the overheated economy during economic prosperity.

Moreover, Keynes believes that fiscal policy is more effective than monetary policy during economic recession, because monetary policy may be failure due to the so-called “liquidity trap”. The real cause of liquidity trap has been explained in Lecture 19, which is different from Keynes’s idea.

With the support of seemingly reasonable Keynes’s theories, governments of various countries have rightfully and crazily expanded expenditures, claiming that they have done so for the good of economy. As a result, the fiscal deficits of many countries rose sharply and accounted for a higher and higher proportion of GDP. For example, in Greece that has been in sovereign debt crisis, the fiscal deficit accounted for 160% of GDP in 2012. In other words, all in Greece have worked hard for one year and the wealth created is not enough to repay the country’s debt. If it happened on an individual or a company, it is insolvent and should be bankrupt.

If Keynes resurrected and saw that there were full of countries overwhelmed by fiscal deficits and debt crises in the world nowadays, he might be very surprised why the governments did not increase tax and reduce expenditure when the economy is prosperous to have fiscal surplus covering the fiscal deficit in economic recession. It is naive to think that government really believes Keynes. In fact, government does not believe Keynes, but just makes use of him! Government is willing to follow Keynes’s first half statement (when there is economic recession, government should increase expenditure without worrying about fiscal deficit), because it is convenient for it to get rid of tax restriction to spend freely. As for the latter half of Keynes’s statement (when there is economic prosperity, government should increase tax and reduce expenditure to have fiscal surplus to cover the fiscal deficit before, and keep budget balance within an economic cycle), it will not care.

Even for an ordinary individual, when he gets used to spending lavishly, it is very difficult to suddenly cut expenditure and go back to live a prudent life. It is even more difficult for government that spends taxpayers’ money and can easily continue to issue treasury bonds to deal with the fiscal deficit temporarily to cut expenditure and increase tax. Expenditure cut often implies cutting social welfare. Increasing tax and cutting social welfare are both objectionable to the public, especially in those “democratic” countries, so are difficult to be permitted in parliament. In fact, in Greece and even France, after the outbreak of the European debt crisis, the parliamentarians and political parties advocating austerity policy were simply voted out of office.

<script>
MathJax = {
  tex: {
    inlineMath: [['$', '$'], ['\\(', '\\)']]
  }
};
</script>
<script id="MathJax-script" async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-chtml.js">
</script>