# Lecture 11: The Concept of Cost

From this lecture on, we will turn from consumer theory to theory of firm. As mentioned in Lecture 10, consumer theory of MSE is useless in explaining phenomenon, while there are full of serious mistakes in the theory of firm which will be discussed from this lecture on.

In many microeconomics textbooks nowadays, the issue about “the cause of firm” is included in the theory of firm. However, the cause of firm does not belong to the traditional theory of firm at all, but to the firm theory. “Theory of Firm” and “Firm Theory” does look very similar, but they are in fact rather different. Theory of firm studies the production process that how many inputs will produce how many outputs, focusing on the technical characteristics of production, and belongs to microeconomics (price theory). By contrast, firm theory studies the organizational form or contractual arrangement for production, focusing on the contractual or institutional characteristics of production, and belongs to new institutional economics.

In theory, production does not need to be carried out through firms. A street vendor or a store runner is an individual, not a firm. He also engages in the activities of supplying goods in the market. Of course, in modern society, a lot of production is carried out through firms rather than individuals, because it is more advantageous to organize individuals in cooperative production in the form of firms. However, the traditional theory of firm does not care about this phenomenon, and does not ask what makes firm as an organizational form more advantageous than the self-employed individual. It only studies how many production factors a producer (no matter he is an individual or a firm) inputs and then how many outputs he can get technically, and presents this technical feature mathematically with production function. Production function is just an equation reflecting the technical characteristics of production, so it is essentially not economics at all, but engineering. In reality, if different organizational forms or institutions are used along with the same technology, the same inputs will produce different outputs. It is precisely the problem that economics should study, because it cannot be answered by engineering.

The traditional theory of firm is essentially an engineering theory, not an economic theory. A theory studying production that truly belongs to economics cannot ignore the organizational form, contractual arrangement or institutional conditions of production, which is bound to fall within the scope of new institutional economics. In other words, the constraint of transaction cost must be considered and included in such a real economic theory.

However, in this and the following two lectures, we will first introduce the “pure” theory of firm that does not need to consider the constraint of transaction cost. It does not mean that there is no transaction cost in production, but that under specific circumstances, transaction cost is are not the key constraint that determines the change in production and can be classified as “the other factors unchanged”. Later in this book, the concept of transaction cost will introduced in detail, and then it will be also discussed in detail as a key constraint that determines the organizational form, contractual arrangement or institutional conditions of production. Only at that time can we analyze the cause of firm.