# Section3: The Disturbance of Historical Cost

Some may ask: since historical cost does not affect human’s choices, why is the concept of cost commonly used in daily life historical cost? Because under the constraint of information cost, there is still function of historical cost that human often use historical cost to estimate opportunity cost. As mentioned earlier, opportunity cost is not the actual expenditure, but the highest income given up. Since opportunity cost is the highest income given up, it is difficult to know exactly what the income is for the option that has not been chosen. Therefore opportunity cost is not easy to estimate, unlike historical cost which is what has happened and the value of it is fixed. In other words, generally the information cost of opportunity cost is higher than that of historical cost, so human tend to estimate opportunity cost based on historical cost, which is based on the assumption that the constraints that determined what had happened in the past will continue to determine what will happen in the future. As mentioned in Lecture 8, there is a school called “technical analysis” in the stock market that uses the path of the stock prices in the past to guess that in the future, which is precisely because the information cost for predicting the stock price is too high. It is the same as the explanation for human using historical cost to estimate opportunity cost. Just as it is wrong for the school of technical analysis” to assume that what had happened in the past will continue to happen in the future, it is also wrong to estimate the opportunity cost by historical cost. Human are not unaware of the problem with this assumption, but under the constraint of the high information cost, they can only choose to inaccurately estimate opportunity cost based on such a problematic assumption. As has been mentioned in Lecture 3, human are rational, which does not mean that they will not make wrong choices.

Steven. N. S. Cheung has given a real example of selling used camera lens, which can well illustrate how people are misled by historical cost and mistakenly estimate opportunity cost under the constraint of information cost. Cheung intended to sell a used camera lens in the United States in 1970s. He had bought the lens for 500 dollar a few years ago, and he thought the depreciation of it should be 200 dollar, so he offered it for 300 dollar in the newspaper. There were so many buyers competing to buy it that it was sold out for 400 dollar finally. Only later did he know that the new product of the lens was selling for more than 1,000 dollar in the market. He sold it too cheaply.

The purchase price of 500 dollar after deducting depreciation is 300 dollar, which is historical cost. The opportunity cost of the used camera lens should be the current price of new product after deducting depreciation, which is more than 800 dollar. Cheung made a wrong choice because he did not know the information of the current price of new product. Of course, he could investigate the current price of the new product before selling the used lens, and then he would not be misled by historical cost, which would take time and effort that is precisely information cost. Generally speaking, due to the technical depreciation caused by technological progress, even if there is no physical depreciation caused by the use, the price of a good usually tends to drop over time. However, the constraint of technological progress is not always the key one that determines the price; otherwise there would be no antiques which are the older the more valuable. If one saves the information cost by not investigating the current price, he will take the risk that the constraint of technological progress may not be the key one that determines the price. In the later lecture of “Information Cost”, it will be pointed out that risk can be measured by information cost. If there are risks, it actually means that there are information costs. When one saves the information cost of investigation, he has to take the risk of making wrong decision which is also another kind of information cost. When Cheung sold his used camera lens, he must have thought the information cost of the latter was lower, so he chose to take the risk.

His choice can be simulated by the table 11-5. Suppose there is not depreciation of the used camera lens for simplicity, there are two options: A is to investigate the current price, and B is to estimate the price directly based on the historical cost of 500 dollar. For option A, before the investigation, he estimated that there would be 1% of possibility that the lens had appreciated over the years, while there would be 99% of possibility that the price had not changed. And it would take time and effort to investigate the current price, which was assumed to be equivalent to 10 dollar for him. Thus, the income of option A is 1000×1%＋500×99%－10＝495 dollar. For option B, there was no cost in investigating the current price, so the income is simply 500 dollar. Those who would minimize cost naturally chose B under such constraint. Attention: the market price of 1000 dollar known afterwards could not be regarded as the income of option A, because it was not known at the time of making decision. If it were known, there would be no risk or information cost about knowing the current price, and there would be no need to calculate the income of A with probability or mathematical expectation.

|| Income | Cost |
|----|----|----|
| A：Investigate the current price |495|500|
| B：Estimate by historical cost |500|495|
<div align= "center">
Table 11-5
</div>

Of course, if the second-hand commodity is something with high possibility of appreciation (such as antiques), the probability in the mathematical expectation will need to be adjusted, and option A is entirely possible to be the optimum with lower cost. Suppose the possibility a good appreciating to 1000 dollar is 50% instead of 1%, so the possibility of that the price of 500 dollar has not changed is 50%. Thus the income of investigating the current price becomes 1000×50%＋500×50%－10＝740 dollar, as shown in the table 11-6.

Obviously, under the above constraint, people will definitely choose to investigate the current price, even if it takes time and energy for the investigation which is equivalent to 10 dollar, and will not be satisfied with estimating the price based on historical cost.

|| Income | Cost |
|----|----|----|
| A：Investigate the current price |740|500|
| B：Estimate by historical cost |500|740|

<div align= "center">
Table 11-6
</div>

In brief, as long as the information cost is low enough compared to the incremental income brought by the investigation, people will not choose to estimate opportunity cost with historical cost. And then it is clear that the essence of choice is based on opportunity cost rather than historical cost.

Looking back on the example of the masks during SARS: When SARS broke out, there were so many reports from the media that masks could prevent the droplet transmission, that the mask suppliers could easily know that even if they raised the price to RMB10, they could sell out the masks, which means the information cost about the opportunity cost of masks had fallen to 0. No wonder the mask suppliers no longer estimated opportunity cost with historical cost as before, and chose to raise the price directly based on opportunity cost.
