# Section 4: The Laboratory in Economics

From the discussion about opportunity cost and historical cost, readers should have a good understanding how to test an economic theory with facts. Under normal circumstances, it seems that suppliers’ pricing behaviors are based on historical cost, because they carefully record the historical cost of various commodities in accounting books. In fact, they only estimate opportunity cost by historical cost under the constraint of high information cost. However, how do economists know that suppliers’ pricing behaviors are actually based on opportunity costs rather than historical costs? Under normal circumstances, due to the high information cost, suppliers’ behaviors of using historical cost to estimate opportunity cost cause historical cost cannot be separated from opportunity cost. Therefore, economists have to find some very special circumstances where the constraint of information cost becomes insignificant, so suppliers do not need to estimate opportunity cost by historical cost. Only then can historical cost and opportunity cost be clearly separated, and it is clear that it is opportunity cost that actually determines human’s behaviors or decision-makings.

It is logically similar that before Galileo, it seemed that the heavier a body was, the faster it fell down, which meant the speed of a falling body was determined by constraint of its weight or mass. However, it is only because the air friction is an important constraint that affects the speed of the falling body in the environment of the earth. The air friction is related to the mass, or strictly speaking the density, of a body, so it interferes with the effect of gravity, which has seriously misled scientists for a long time.

In 1969, when man landed on the moon for the first time, the astronaut has done a physical experiment that he let go of an iron ball and a feather at the same height and at the same time on the surface of the moon. These two bodies were observed to land on the ground at the same time.  In such an environment as the moon close to vacuum, the air friction is reduced to basically 0, and it is successfully separated from the effect of gravity. And then it is clear that it is gravity rather than the weight or the mass of a body that actually determines the falling speed of a body.

Economics is a science, which is essentially the same as natural science like physics. There are many constraints that affect the research objects. Scientists must try to separate different constraints to study their effects. The advantage of natural science like physics is that it can artificially create an experimental environment that separates different constraints in the laboratory, while economics, as a social science, cannot do so. Although there is so-called “experimental economics”, this attempt to imitate natural science and conduct controlled experiments is fundamentally out of line with the nature of economics as a social science. The constraint in economics is social, not physical, and the nature of sociality will be lost if it is separated from the society in reality. However, economics has its own laboratory which is the reality. Economists do not need any controlled laboratory. What they need is to open their eyes and look for those special circumstances in reality which can meet the requirement of separating the different constraints. For example, SARS is such a special circumstance when the information cost of mask suppliers’ pricing could be reduced to 0, meeting the requirement of separating historical cost from opportunity cost.

When Galileo discovered the law of free falling body, the physicists did not have much better experimental conditions than the economists nowadays. They had not the advanced technology that later sent the astronaut to the moon to drop an iron ball and a feather at the same time. Neither had they a laboratory to conduct experiments with vacuum environment. Galileo's experiment was to plane a piece of wood very smooth and set it up as all kinds of slopes with different leans, and let a ball roll down from the slope. He used this experiment to replace the experiment of free falling body, accurately calculating the relationship between distance and time, and making a decisive experimental conclusion.

As for economists, they should never expect to have a laboratory that can really stimulate the reality including all the key social constraints. They should try to know more about the reality, looking for the extreme cases that can meet the specific requirements.

Do not worry there are too few such extreme cases. It seems that such cases as SARS are very rare to happen. However the cases when the information cost falls to zero, separating historical cost from opportunity cost do not just the masks during SARS. For example, antique is also such a case!

Antique is a good that most typically implies that historical cost has no effect on pricing. The historical cost of a bowl made in the Tang Dynasty is negligible compared with the price of it in the market nowadays. Anyone will realize that historical cost has nothing to do with the price of an antique. There has been a long and difficult process for economists to understand opportunity cost. The classical economists, just like Aristotle in ancient Greece, were misled by the superficial phenomena to think that historical cost was the determinant of the value or price of a good, so the Theory of Labor Value was rather popular in classical period. There are two mistakes in this theory: one is that labor is regarded as the only source of the value of a good, and the other is that historical cost (the labor input during the production) is cost.

The former mistake will be discussed in the next lecture. Here the latter mistake will be discussed. Classical economists felt very confused with antiques, because they were obvious to refute the theory of labor value which thought that the value of a good should be determined by the labor input during the production. Ricardo had to divide all goods into two kinds: ordinary goods and antiques, arguing that the theory of labor value theory could apply to ordinary goods, while the value of antiques should be explained by another theory. However, Ricardo’s contraction the application of the theory of labor value could not save it from being refuted by such goods as the masks during SARS that are not antiques. What is more, the concept of opportunity cost can explain the pricing of all good, no matter they are antiques or the masks during SARS, so it has stronger explanatory power and more widely application than the theory of labor value which essentially explains the pricing of goods with historical cost. That is one of the reasons why the theory of labor value has been abandoned.
