# Section 2: Use Value VS Utility — Methodology of Science (3): What is measure in science?

Before deriving indifference curve, a concept of “utility” should be discussed first. What is utility? Chinese students all have learned Marxist economics in middle school. There is a concept of “use value” in Marxist economics, which is not invented by Marx, but by Adam Smith and is widely used by classical economists. “Use value” is actually a very good concept, but it was invented along with the “theory of labor value” which was refuted by facts and abandoned now, so it is also abandoned and replaced by the concept of “utility” which is worse than it.

The concept of “utility” was invented by Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832), a British philosopher, who was famous for his philosophy of “utilitarianism”. This concept was introduced into economics by the economists who initiated the marginal revolution, and replaced the concept of “use value”. However, economists have completely changed the original meaning of utility which meant the pursuit of happiness and avoidance of pain in utilitarianism advocated by Bentham.

Now in economics, utility is a measurement of human’s preference for goods, which means it is used to measure the psychological factor of preference, so it is not a fact, and if directly applied to explain phenomena there will be the mistake of tautology. In order to avoid the trap of tautology, we have to look for the objective constraints that cause the psychological factor of preference, which means we must ask: why does a person prefer a specific good? The answer is because the good can meet some of his needs, which simply means that the good has “use value” for him!
In other words, “use value” is directly related to objective constraints and is a fact, while “utility” is directly related to psychological factor of preference and is not a fact. Compared with “use value”, when “utility” is applied in explanation, it is either easy to fall into the trap of tautology, or we need to look for objective constraints to replace the psychological factors, which is too long-winded and against “Occam’s Razor” in methodology of science, so it is not a good concept. However, utility is easy to use mathematics to represent, so it is widely used in academic papers of economics. How much there is empty economic paper just filled with utility analysis in the form of mathematical equations nowadays!

Therefore, we advocate abandoning the concept of “utility” which is good-looking but empty, and returning to the concept of “use value” which is simple but objective.

However, in the concept of “use value” advocated by Adam Smith (and Marx), there is a major mistake which must be corrected. In Smith’s view, the same good has the same use value for different people. In fact, the use value of the same good can be completely different for different people, times and places. For example, when I am a teacher, and I keep talking all the class, so I need to take water which is of high use value to me. But for the students who just sit and listen most of the time, water is not absolutely necessary and of low use value. Therefore, the use value of water is different for different people, which does not mean it is psychological.
Furthermore, the use value of water can be different at different times and in different places. Suppose one is in the desert without water, and another one appears in front of him with a bottle of water. How much would he like to spend to buy the water? The answer is: he would be willing to give all his money in exchange. The use value of the water now is so high for him under such circumstances that it is equivalent to the value of life!

By the way, there is also a concept of “exchange value” in Marxist economics (actually in classical economics) which is distinguished from price. However this distinguish is meaningless, and exchange value is the same as price. Of course, there is relationship between price (exchange value) and use value (utility), but not the kind of relationship advocated by Marxist economics, which will be discussed in the later lecture.

Early economists thought utility could be measured quantitatively, which means it was cardinal magnitude. However, later they found that utility could only be ordinal magnitude. Cardinal magnitude is one, two, three ..., which can be used for four fundamental operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. For example, the length is cardinal magnitude, so it can be calculated that a rope of 3 meters is 2 meters longer than a rope of 1 meter, and the two ropes are 4 meters long in total when connected. And ordinal magnitude is the first, second, third ..., which can only be sorted, but cannot be used for four fundamental operations. What is the first plus the third? It cannot be the fourth.

Since ordinal magnitudes can only be sorted but not be used for four fundamental operations, cardinal magnitudes are often used to replace them. For example, in the beauty contests mentioned above, the judges will give scores to each contestant. The scores are cardinal magnitudes which can not only be sorted, but also be used for four fundamental operations. Suppose the champion’s score is 90 points, the second runner-up’s is 85 points and the third runner-up’s is 70 points, the gap between the champion and the second runner-up is smaller than that between the second runner-up and the third runner-up. However, these scores are only for the convenience of summing up the contestants’ performances in different contest sections to get a final result. So they do not really reflect the gap between the different runners-up. When an ordinal magnitude is replaced with a cardinal magnitude for convenience of operation, we must be very careful not to mistakenly include the properties that the ordinal magnitude does not have but are included in the cardinal magnitude. That is why the utility theory is full of traps. In addition to the aforementioned problem that utility is intention and cannot be directly used to explain phenomena, there is also risk of making mistakes when economists use mathematics to express utility. Do not forget that utility is ordinal magnitude rather than cardinal one, so the four fundamental operations may not be appropriate in analysis.

Here is the third part of the methodology of science in this book: what is measure in science? As for “measurement”, those who do not understand MS generally have two interrelated misunderstandings: firstly, they think that only what is measureable is scientific. Secondly, they think there is only cardinal measurement. The combination of these two misunderstanding leads to the wrong conclusion that only “quantitative analysis” (as opposed to “qualitative analysis”) is accurate or “measurable”, and is scientific. Marx made such a mistake, saying that “only by making full use of mathematics can any science reach a perfect state”, which is totally wrong from the perspective of MS. As has been explained in Lecture 2, it is “refutability” that is the essential characteristic of science, while mathematics is not science, which is only a tool that can but not must be used to assist in the logical reasoning in the second stage of science. Further, mathematics is not equivalent to measurement which is statistics! What’ s more, there is not only quantitative analysis or cardinal measurement. There have been three mistakes of disguised replacement of concept here: to replace the concept of science with mathematics, to replace the concept of mathematics with statistics, and to replace the concept of statistics with quantitative analysis, which results in the replacement of truth with accuracy appeared by quantitative analysis. It is precisely the so-called “accurately false”.

In recent years, there have been such accurately false developments in many social sciences, which is exactly economics that has firstly abused mathematics. Economics is closest to natural science in social science because Adam Smith, the founder of economics, found the postulate of “self-interest” as the first stage of science, and Marshall introduced mathematics into economics as a tool to assist logical reasoning in the second stage of science. It is clear that all Marshall did with mathematics were qualitative analysis, so he knew very well that mathematics is not equal to cardinal measurement. It is on the third stage of fact tests that economics unknowingly went astray.  Economists who do not understand MS see that in the second stage mathematics is widely used, just like natural science, they mistakenly think that in the third stage economics also needs quantitative analysis, just like natural science. Science requires fact tests, but it has never required that only data are facts. Natural science can do experiments in laboratories, so data are generally facts, and most of them are cardinal magnitudes. In contrast, social science is the study on human beings and cannot do experiments in laboratories, which will be explained in detail in the later lecture of “concept of cost”, so data are not necessarily equal to facts. What’s more, the data suitable for describing human behaviors are generally ordinal magnitudes instead of cardinal ones. Take the beauty contests mentioned above as an example. The champion got the highest score of 90 points, the runner-up 85 points, and the third runner-up 70 points. These three cardinal magnitudes are only meaningful in ranking orders.

Nowadays, in many social sciences, econometric (statistical) analysis is widely used as fact tests to show that they are scientific. However, social science cannot do experiments, and there are too few social statistical data, so many studiers use “questionnaire survey” to obtain enough data. In questionnaires, there are full of such question: “do you think something is (a) very important; (b) important; (c) less important; (d) completely unimportant,” and then arbitrarily assign each option such 10 points for (a) and 7 points for item (b) ... and then sum up these cardinal magnitudes which are only meaning full in sorting. If only the summation results are sorted to show whether most think that something is the first or the second important just like the winners order in beauty contests, it makes some sense. After all, it is still back to the nature of ordinal magnitude, although the logical reliability of the summation in the intermediate stage is very doubtful. It is worse that some studiers directly put the data obtained from the summation of the ordinal magnitudes so suspiciously into the regression equation, and make a “student’s t test” or something like that, then claim that the theory has been tested ... They ignore the ordinal nature of the data which are used for four fundamental operations. No matter scientists respecting facts or mathematicians respecting strict logics will never admit what they do is scientific or logic. However, there are full of such so-called test which is neither scientific nor mathematical in all kinds of academic publications in social sciences. What is the difference between them and pseudo-science by cheaters?

In the third stage of science, to be “roughly true” is much preferred to “accurately false”. Precision is not equal to truth, and accurate mistakes are pseudo-science in essence, which is worse than non-science! Non-science, such as religious belief, ethics, mathematical logics, also has its significance in some aspects, while pseudo-science is pure fraud. The “roughly true” conclusions come from ordinal measurement which seems not very accurate from the perspective of cardinality, but is logically reliable. As for how to use ordinal measurement, the “marginal analysis” introduced in lecture 7 is a powerful tool.
