# Section 2: The Importance of Expectation/Confidence

Example II: the earthquake of China in 2008

Unlike financial crisis in virtual economy discussed in Section 1, the natural disasters such as earthquake actually destroy real wealth in physical form. However, it is also agreed that the earthquake of China in 2008, although destructive, there have been massive reconstructions there, and the economic growth has not even stopped. Similarly, from the perspective of a long history, it was only a small episode on the long journey of the local economy, and did not change the general direction of economic growth in the region at all.

Why? The answer is also simple. The earthquake did have destroyed some real wealth, but the remaining wealth still had the productive capacity to create more new wealth. As long as people are confident in the future and work hard, the destroyed wealth can be fully made up sooner or later. The key is people have positive expectations for future economic growth, and engage in creating more new wealth.

Conclusion: Although natural disasters such as earthquake do destroy real wealth, as long as people’s confidence in future economic growth is not destroyed, the remaining real wealth can quickly create more new wealth to make up for the destroyed part.

Extension: The World War II was not a natural disaster that destroyed some (in fact, most) real wealth, but Japan and Germany as defeated countries that suffered the most were the fastest-recovering and rapidly rising economies after the war. Although most real wealth was destroyed in the war, both countries have established a more reasonable economic system (especially compared with Britain, where the leftist Labor Party came into power and implemented nationalization and government intervention), so people had positive confidence in the future and were willing to work hard. The houses and machines were almost destroyed, while skilled labor, as the most important production factor, were relatively well preserved and of high quality. As a result, these two countries took the lead in recovering, experienced rapid economic growth and caught up with the US quickly.

One more extension: The devastating earthquake of Japan in 2011, together with the following tsunami affected millions of thousands people. Ten times of the damages of financial crisis in 1997 might not match that of this natural disaster. The following nuclear leakage was even much worse, because it was continuously threatening to destroy real wealth (including real goods and human lives), which could strike people’s confidence in the future more than a one-off catastrophe. What is more, Japan has been in economic depression for 20 years since the 1990s, and people’s confidence in economic growth has already been hit hard. With pessimistic expectations, the production factors such as capital and high-quality talents that were easy to flow (easy to run away) would flow out of Japan in large quantities.

As a result, compared with the earthquake of China in 2008, that of Japan in 2011 was quite different in that it not only has destroyed real wealth, but also destroyed people’s confidence.
