# Section 2: Normative economics

However, government always asks economists questions of “ought to be”, such as how should government solve an economic problem, or whether a policy is good or bad and whether it should implement or not……So how should economists do?
To answer these questions, economists should answer the question of “to be”, that is, analyze empirically at first. Take the case of car airbag in Lecture 3 for example. Government might ask economists: “Should be a policy of stipulating all cars to have airbags implemented?” Economists should conduct objective scientific analysis with economics at first, pointing out that because of the self-interested nature of human, with airbags on cars, drivers will drive more recklessly, which lead to more car accidents and casualties. Then economists do not need to say anything more, and government would naturally know how to do. If what government wants are fewer car accidents and casualties, given the economists’ analysis, it is clear that a mandatory stipulation of car airbags can not hit the target.

Of course, it is also possible that government has colluded with airbag manufacturers, so what it wants is to force everyone to buy airbags. Obviously it is improper for the airbag manufacturers to openly claim that they push government to implement a policy for their interest, so they come up with a seemingly plausible and grandiose reason. Government explains that airbags can help to reduce casualties when a car accident happens, so they are good for drivers. If the objective and neutral economists present the correct economic analysis mentioned above, the self-interested airbag manufacturers will often deliberately incite the resentments of the public, cause confusions in the argument, and attack the economists for not caring about drivers’ life as immoral. The ignorant public cannot objectively analyze the truth, so are easy to cheat. Some of them are drivers, and they wrongly believe that the agents of airbag manufacturers care more about their benefits than the neutral and so-called “immoral” economists. Airbag manufacturers will surely try to hide their real purpose from the public, so they let their agents, including some other economists who appear to have no interest with them, to speak in public. Finally government implements the stipulation about airbags, ostensibly accepting the advice of some economists who are agents of airbag manufacturers while turning his back to the objective and neutral analysis. Some ignorant enjoy the pleasure of scolding the so-called “immoral” economists. Moreover, the drivers have to spend more money on car airbags, not knowing that they may bear a higher risk of car accident casualties!

Such cases happen again and again in reality: government asks for advice from economists about policy, but he may not be for the public’s interest. Some economists are either disabled or not objectively neutral. The public can not positively analyze the effect of the policy, so they do not know the truth and enjoy the pleasure of scolding others. The victims are harmed in ignorance, and at the same time, pay for the costs in silence.

The society is full of such self-interested persons who have complicated interests and speak with deceptions. One of the purposes of studying economics is precisely to learn to analyze objectively. Positive economics teaches us not to ask the questions of “ought to be”, but only or at least firstly ask the questions of “to be”. Please do not believe what the self-interested persons say, but observe what they do. It is not essential what the good intentions of the government’s policies are, while what the measurable effects they have mattered because the final effects often run counter with the original intentions.

Therefore, normative economics, or “normative analysis”, must be based on the empirical or positive analysis. Only after the empirical analysis is conducted can we take value judgment into account. Take the example of airbags: what does government want? If he does want to reduce car accidents, it is not necessary to make a policy about airbags. It would be the opposite case for policy-making if what he wants is to benefit airbag manufacturers. A value judgment is not science but ethics, and government often has its idea, so economists should not put a finger in, or else they will just be used for the unspoken purpose.
