# Section 4: The Problems of Welfare Economics

In economics, the normative analysis is concentrated in a branch called “welfare economics”. Do not misunderstand that it is the study of the welfare economy; instead, it tries to use “waste” or “inefficiency” as an objective criterion to answer the question of “to be”.

Welfare economics will be discussed in the later lecture of “The Coase Theorem”, and herein we just give a brief. There cannot be “waste” or “inefficiency” in economics, which is a direct conflict with the postulate of self-interest. In Lecture 3, it has been emphasized that there cannot be any theory or explanation conflict with the postulate of self-interest. In that lecture, it has also been pointed out that the so-called “irrationality” is wrong in that information costs (a kind of transaction costs) are ignored, so human is rational to choose to be ignorant. The so-called “waste” or “inefficiency” in welfare economics is also wrong in neglecting transaction costs.

In Lecture 1, it has been cautious that there are many mistakes in MSE. They stem from two primary sources, one of which is the omission of critical constraints, and transaction costs are precisely the constraints that are often overlooked. The theories neglecting transaction costs will be a conflict with the postulate of self-interest, and of course they are serious mistakes, just as the laws that are conflict with the Constitution are serious mistakes. If a law is unconstitutional, it must be amended to conform to the Constitution, or even repealed. According to the same logic, welfare economics, which takes “waste” or “inefficiency” as the criterion of value judgment and is a conflict with the postulate of self-interest, should be abandoned.
