# Section3: Value Judgment

As mentioned at the end of the previous lecture, non-price criteria would lead to rent dissipation which is a kind of transaction costs. Although there is not rent dissipation for price criterion, there is transaction cost (in a narrow sense) for using the market. What is more, in order for price criterion to be established, there must be a legal system protecting PPRs as the game rule, and there is also transaction cost (in a broad sense) for the establishment, operation and maintenance of the legal system. Therefore, whether people choose price criterion or non-price criteria depends on their transaction costs under different constraints. Self-interested people will, of course, choose the criterion with less transaction cost.

In fact, in such cases as to how to allocate seats in a classroom, people will seldom choose price criterion (e.g. auction). However, it is neither decided by democratic voting or by force, but the non-price criterion of first-come-first-served. Why? Because the benefit of the best seat is minor. In order to distribute such a minor benefit, it is not worth taking the trouble to organize an auction or voting, or fight with each other, which means there is transaction cost and it outweighs the benefit. Although there is rent dissipation (a kind of transaction costs) for first-come-first-served as a non-price criterion, it is still the least costly way among all for the allocation of seats in a classroom and chosen by self-interested people.
In reality, there are both market (price criterion) and non-market (non-price criteria) behaviors, but the latter is often ignored in MSE. There is a big issue related to this ignorance: is the market economy better or planned economy better? There was once a heated ideological debate in China, and today it seems that a conclusion has been reached that the market economy is good. Really?

What is the meaning of “good”? If one likes an apple, he will think apples are good. While if one likes pears, he will think pears are good. Here good and bad are subjective value judgments, and there is no objective standard, so it is a question that science cannot answer. However, if an objective criterion (for example, the more the nutrition, the better) is set in advance, and it is also necessary to precisely determine what kind of nutrition it is, who will eat the fruit, and whether he lacks that kind of nutrition, which are all constraints, then science can answer the question “Which is better for someone, apple or pear?” Strictly speaking, science answers the question “which is more nutritious for someone, apple or pear”, and further answers the question “should someone eat apple or pear?”

Turn to economics. Is the market economy better or planned economy better? If there is no objective standard set in advance, it can only be judged by subjective value, and economics as a science cannot answer. However, if “the less the cost is, the better” is the objective standard, the question becomes: “is the cost of a market economy or a planned economy less?” Market economy and planned economy are different economic institutions. As will be analyzed in the later lecture on “transaction costs”, the cost of an institution is the transaction costs in a broad sense. Therefore, this question is actually about the transaction costs of the market economy and planned economy. However, it can be seen from the above example of allocating the seats in a classroom that it is not enough when there is only objective standard because specific constraints are also needed. Without constraints, it is impossible to identify the transaction costs of different competition criteria.
As mentioned in the previous section, normative economics must be based on empirical analysis, along with objective standard which should be set in advance. Firstly in empirical analysis, different choices are analyzed under specific constraints. Then according to the objective standard set in advance, economics as science can answer the questions of “ought to be.”
