# Section 8: The Extremely Low Rate of Return of Social Pension Insurance

When it comes to insurance, the social old-age pension (SOP, a major part of social security, and called “endowment insurance” in China) must be discussed in detail.
From the experience of various nations in the world, there is so serious problem in SOP that it is a terrible fiscal black hole. Sooner or later, it will swallow up a nation’s fiscal money and even its wealth until it goes bankrupt! So far, no nation can solve the problem.
On the surface, the problem of SOP lies in the extremely low rate of return. According to the data in the table of the following reading material “Is Social Security a Good Deal?”, the present value[^1] of SOP in the United States is negative for all, and those with more education or born later suffer more serious loss.

> READING MATERIAL: IS SOCIAL SECURITY A GOOD DEAL?[^2]
>
> The U.S. Social Security system provides old-age pensions to millions of Americans. In contrast with private pension contracts, participation in Social Security is compulsory. Partly for this reason, there has been continuing debate over almost every aspect of the program.
>
> One question has been whether, viewed as a saving program, Social Security is a “good deal” for participants. That is, viewed as an individual’s saving project, is its Present Value positive? The question is difficult to answer, owing to the many changes that have been made and will surely continue to be made as to required contributions (what percentage of wages has to be paid in Social Security taxes), benefit levels (what pension amounts will be received), and eligibility rules (for example, at what age can a person retire and become a beneficiary).
>
> Looking at the past, it is possible to examine the results for earlier participants. After its initiation in 1935 early enrollees in Social Security did very well. Early participants who had made contributions even for only a very few years received retirement benefits that were calculated much as if they had been under Social Security and contributing to the program all  their working lives! (This factor added enormously to the initial political acceptability of the program.) Another initially favorable feature was the large ratio of working contributors to retirees. But these unusually advantageous circumstances were only temporary. By now almost all beneficiaries have been paying into the program all their working lives, as will be the case for new entrants from now on. And the aging of the U.S. population has reduced the fraction of contributors relative to beneficiaries.
>
> Looking toward the future, whether Social Security is a good deal in terms of Present Value depends upon a host of more or less arguable assumptions about what will happen in future years. Although no single evaluation can be expected to resolve debate, a study by Liqun Lee and Andrew J. Rettenmeier offered several interesting results.[^3]
>
> The authors estimated future levels of taxes and benefits and estimated participants’ projected earnings, retirement choices, and longevity. Some illustrative results are shown in the table, for Present Values calculated at a relatively low discount rate of 4%. (As the text indicates, a low discount rate increases the indicated Present Values of investment projects or saving programs.)
>
> For single men the Present Values shown in the table are all negative! The results for single women, and for married men with nonworking wives, are only slightly more favorable: for these groups the Present Values are positive only for workers in the earliest birth years and with the lowest education levels.
>
> The *relatively* more favorable results for those of earlier birth years reflects the initially low Social Security taxes. Rising longevity and the increasingly unfavorable ratio of pensioners to contributors have since caused tax rates to rise sharply. “Progressive” elements have been incorporated from the beginning, to assure a decent minimum standard of benefit even for low-earning workers. So low-income contributors have always done relatively better than high-income contributors. Nevertheless, the table indicates negative Present Values for all the groups tabulated.
>
> **COMMENT**
>
> Although these results may be questioned in detail, it appears that for most participants Social Security is financially a bad deal. True, Social Security was not intended to be an actuarially sound pension program but has always involved a redistributive element. But even for the least well off participants, the Present Value of Social Security as a savings program is at best only barely positive. Considerations of this kind have motivated proposals for reforms of Social Security that would bring it closer to an actuarially based pension program, while granting participants better control over the placement of their individual contributions.
>
> **Projected present values of social security investments – single men**
>
>|Birth year|High School graduates|College graduates|Graduate school|
>|----|----|----|----|
>|1940|-27000|-33|-33000|
>|1950|-32000|-45000|-49000|
>|1960|-34000|-53000|-59000|
>|1970|-33000|-58000|-75000|
>|1980|-32000|-63000|-93000|
> <sub> Source: Estimated visually from Lee and Rettenmeier, Figure 2.</sub>

It is not an exception unique to the United States. All nations with SOP, without exception, are in deep crisis of severe losses. It is said that many local governments in the United States are facing financial bankruptcy, and the biggest debt comes from the burden of SOP. Similarly, there are several European countries in sovereign debt crisis, but why are the fiscal expenditures so large that they cannot be reduced? One of the main reasons is that the SOP, like a black hole, has swallowed up a large amount of fiscal income. Hong Kong started to implement the “Mandatory Provident Fund Scheme” 10 years ago, which is essentially a SOP. Ten years later, the rate of return is zero! It is actually a good performance compared with the European and American countries mentioned above, but it is only because it has lasted not long enough. As time goes by, the rate of return must fall below zero and the loss will become more and more serious.

Why is the rate of return of SOP so low? The direct reason is administrative monopoly. If any commercial insurance company shows to the customers the table with negative present value in the reading material above, it is impossible for anyone to be so stupid to participate such a pension program. In other words, SOP cannot survive in the market. Now it can still survive just because government forces everyone to participate.

SOP is a saving insurance, so the premium has been being paid several years, more than ten years, or even decades, before the annuity needs to be returned. At the beginning, as long as there are enough new participators, SOP can use the premium paid by the others to return the annuity to those who have soon started to retire. However, as mentioned in last section, saving insurance should return the annuity with the premium paid by the same insured, and should not use the premium of the others as consumption insurance does, because saving insurance is actually not insurance, but saving. A policyholder will retire at the specified time and need the annuity to be returned, which is certain without risk. If one’s money in his investment (saving) account is used as the investment (saving) income to another one, it is essentially a Ponzi scheme!

The Ponzi scheme is a kind of “pyramid scheme” and was invented by a businessman named Ponzi in Boston in the early 20th century. Ponzi claimed that he had a complicated investment project that buying some kind of stamps in Europe and then shipping them to the United States for sale. By earning a profit from the difference in the price between Europe and the US, the investors could get a return of up to 50% within 45 days. In order to win people’s trust, the first investors all received the promised returns within the specified time, so a large number of investors were attracted. In a short period of one year, as many as 40,000 Boston residents were cheated into giving Ponzi about 15 million US dollars, and each of them “invested” several hundred dollars on average. Before exposed, Ponzi was praised as one of the three greatest Italians along with Columbus and Marconi (the inventor of radio), because he “discovered money” like Columbus discovered the new American continent. When a financial expert exposed Ponzi’s investment fraud, he published an article in the newspaper refuting him for knowing nothing.

In fact, Ponzi’s scheme is very simple. The investment principal given to him by the new investor is diverted to pay the old investor as the return. It is the logic of a Chinese saying “Knocking down the east wall to build the west wall”, which means “robbing Peter to pay Paul”. As long as the growth rate of new investment is higher than his promised rate of return on investment, he can always keep this fantastic promise. It is precisely why it is a kind of pyramid scheme: the new investment is the bottom of the pyramid, which is used to support the top of the old investment. However, the law of diminishing marginal returns introduced in Lecture 15 is an iron law that will come into play sooner or later. In other words, the growth rate of new investments will slow down sooner or later, while more and more old investments are requiring returns. Eventually, the bottom of the pyramid will be unable to support the top of it.

Since Ponzi’s scheme was invented, it has been used repeatedly, only more beautiful packaged to cover its truth, such as pyramid selling. The latest financial Ponzi’s sachem was the case of Bernard Madoff Investment Securities founded by the former Nasdaq chairman, which is the biggest fraud in Wall Street history, causing investors to suffer a loss as much as 50 billion US dollars. In the victims, there were many investment veterans whose IQ is high, and experience is rich, but they were still cheated.

However, the largest and most terrible Ponzi scheme in history is actually the SOPs dominated by governments of various nations. With so low rate of return, it would be impossible for SOP to attract the public to participate. At the beginning, it was accepted because the early insured only needed to pay a few years’ premiums to get a pension return much higher than their premiums could support. Where did the extraordinary return on investment come from? It could only come from the premiums paid by those who were young and had to pay for many years before they could receive pension as return. The government has been working hard to expand the coverage of SOP, claiming that it is necessary to cover everyone in the social security to protect him. The truth is, as the number of the insured increases, more and more need to receive pension when they become old and retire. In other words, the top of the pyramid is getting bigger and bigger, so the bottom of it needs to be even bigger and bigger.

Since all are forced to participate SOP, it is actually an administrative monopoly which will not strive to reduce cost and increase return as commercial insurance companies do. However, compulsory insurance is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, it enables the bottom of pyramid to expand rapidly with the strong support of government. On the other hand, it also makes SOP unable to decline those with very high risk, and even unable to charge different premium rate according to different risk. In fact, the rate of return of SOP is extremely low not only because administrative monopoly is always inefficient, and but also because it is unable to adjust the premium rate or even simply decline those with too high risk as commercial insurance companies do, which leads to huge cost or loss.

With the passage of time, the positive side of the double-edged sword of compulsory insurance will become weaker and weaker, because it is impossible for the growth rate of a nation’s population in a certain period of time to exceed that of the top of pyramid. The more powerful the government can increase the number of the insured in the early stage, the greater the pressure will be on the growth rate of the bottom to keep up with that of the top in the later stage. It is not necessary for everyone to be covered in SOP that it has come to the end!

As a result, on the one hand, the extraordinary high return at the beginning quickly disappeared or even fell to negative; on the other hand, the government had to inject fiscal funds into SOP to ensure that it would not go bankrupt, and the premium rate (the social security tax) will inevitably increase. Fiscal fund injection is actually worse than the increase in the premium rate. Where does the government get the fiscal fund? It is not a producer, and does not engage in production activities, so it cannot get income from selling products in the market, but from taxes. In other words, the fiscal fund injection also comes from taxpayers, but they are not clearly collected in the form of premium or tax, which makes the insured not know how low the return on his SOP is. If the premium rate is directly increased, the insured knows that the cost of enjoying SOP has increased. If other taxes increase in order to finance the fiscal fund injected to save SOP, he does not know.

- - - -

[^1]: The term “present value” will be explained in the next lecture of “The Theory of Interest”. Here readers only need to know that the higher the rate of return on an investment (saving), the higher the present value, so in principle, no one will choose an investment (saving) with negative present value that means it is a losing investment.

[^2]: This reading material is an excerpt from “Price Theory and Its Application”, P472.

[^3]: Liqun Lee and Andrew J. Rettenmeier, “Social Security and Education,” National Center for Policy Analysis, Policy Report No. 240 (January 2001).