# Section 5: Replacing Risk with Information Cost

Another major application of information cost is the replacement of the concept of risk.

F. H. Knight (1885-1972) distinguished between “Uncertainty” and “Risk”, but now there is no distinguish between these two concepts in economics. However, there is problem in the concept of risk that it is not observable and refutable. Just like the critique about the concept of equilibrium, look out of the window, can one tell whether there is more or less risk in the world? The concept of equilibrium can be partially saved by assuming that the world is always in a state of equilibrium, but the concept of risk cannot be saved like that, because it is not important to know the world is always in a state of risk. What is important is that when applying the equal marginal principle, we must know the change in constraints. Specifically for risk, we must know whether there is more or less risk with the change in constraints, while it is no need to know there is more or less equilibrium.

It is better to replace the concept of risk with information cost. There is risk, which means people cannot predict the future 100% accurately. In other words, there is information cost which makes people unable to have complete information.

There is “Determinism” in philosophy, which holds that there are objective laws and causality in nature and society. As long as all previous conditions are fully known, the future can be predicted completely and accurately. As a determinist’s saying, my hand is now on my left leg instead of right leg, which has been decided at the moment the universe was formed. Whether determinism is true or not is a philosophical issue, but in economics it can be understood that if one can know all the key constraints that determine the future, he can infer, or not very precisely speaking, predict the future, because it is logically similar to explaining the past. Thus, people will make mistakes in prediction because they do not know all the key constraints in time, which means there is information cost.

Unlike the change in risk that is not observable and refutable, information cost is at least observable at the margin. For example, in modern times, farmers have more sufficient meteorological knowledge and information than those in ancients, which means the information cost on agricultural production has decreased. Obviously, it is more observable than the statement that the risk of agricultural production has decreased.

As mentioned before, theoretically Newton’s law can be applied to accurately infer which side of a coin will face upward when it is thrown up and then falls down. However, physicists can only calculate the probability because there are too many constraints that change fast and affect the coin. Logically similarly, theoretically, the stock market can be accurately inferred by applying the law of demand, but economists can only calculate the probability because there are too many constraints that change fast and affect the stock market.

In fact, in MSE risk is measured by probability, which is problematic. The probability measurement is based on the “Law of Large Numbers” in statistics which states that when the test condition is unchanged and the test is repeated many times, the frequency of a random event is close to the probability of it. Therefore, if the test condition changes, or there are not enough random samples, the result will not be accurate enough.
