# Section 4: The Price-Searching Caused by Information Cost

As mentioned in Lecture 16, one of the causes of monopoly or price-searching is information cost that constitutes the entry threshold of the market. This cause of monopoly is very special, because there are too many producers in the market, which means the number of producers is even more than that in price-taking.

In tourist attractions, there are many stalls selling local specialties that are almost the same, so it is hard to say the producers are monopolists. However, as is known to all (including even the tourists), the prices of the goods there must be higher than those in local ordinary market. Most tourists are still willing to pay higher price because they have to hurry to the next scenic spot and have no time to go to the local ordinary market. It is the rent of the stalls in tourist attractions, partly from the saving the information cost for the tourists to look for the specialties in the local ordinary market.

What is more, there is always bargaining in these stalls selling local specialties, which means both buyers and sellers are searching price! If it is a monopolistic product defined in MSE, bargaining is understandable. But there are so many producers selling similar products, and it seems to be the so-called pure competition, how can be there bargaining? Because it is a local specialty, there is high information cost for tourists as outsiders. On the one hand, tourists will judge quality by price, so if the price is too low, they will think the quality is poor, which will reduce the sales volume and the income. On the other hand, different tourists have different information, so the sellers quote a higher price at the beginning to make room for bargaining. Through bargaining, the sellers can judge how much information the buyers have, according to which, he can adjust the price to charge different price for different buyers with different information. In other words, it is price discrimination.

Why can the producers who allow bargaining and implement price discrimination win those who do not allow bargaining and charge a lower price on average? Because after bargaining, some tourists pay a lower price than that in price-taking, which grabs away the business of the producers charging a price equal to that in price-taking, so they cannot have the optimal quantity and are eliminated. It implies that their pricing is not low enough. But if the price is too low, tourists will think the good is poor in quality, so the sales volume may drop further. As for some tourists who have paid higher price than that in price-taking, they believe that they have bought the good with better quality, which may not be wrong due to the information cost.

However, because the price is quoted higher at the beginning, it is inevitable that some buyers will be scared away, and the number of buyers will be less. Thus, there will be idle salesman, which means that there are too many producers in the market. If there are fewer producers, each producer can serve more customers, and there will be no idle salesman. It seems to be a waste that there are idle salesman, but the reason is information cost, which causes producers to implement price discrimination through bargaining, thus causing there are more producers in the market than those in price-taking without information cost.
