# Section 1: Scarcity

Scarcity means that compared to people’s desire, the goods they want are not enough. Scarcity is an essential constraint because if there were no scarcity, people would not have to make any choice even if they are self-interested. Just imagine that everything we want was unlimitedly satisfying. Thus no matter how self- interested we are, we would always get all of them. So why should we bother to make any choice anymore? However, goods are scarce, and we have to give up something in order to get other things else, so self-interest matters much in carefully calculating how to obtain goods at the lowest price.

In economics, anything of which available is preferred to non-available is defined as a “good” regardless of whether it is a tangible commodity or intangible service, or spiritual enjoyment (including feelings). Some economics textbooks define a “bad” as anything of which non-available is preferred to available, such as garbage and noise. However, with proper redefinition, all “bads” can be converted to “goods”, such as garbage to “cleaning up garbage”. Thus it is not necessary to analyze “bads,” and only “goods” are enough.

If anything of which not only available is preferred to non-available, but also more is preferred to less, it is defined as an “economic good”. That means it is scarce, so anyone who wants to obtain it must pay a cost or a price if it is in the market. If anything of which available is preferred to non-available, but more is not preferred to less, it is a “free good” which means it is not scarce and takes no cost.

We have to be cautious of what is called “free” in daily life as it often means no need to pay the price in the market, which is not the same as taking no cost. So what is free in the market may not be a free good. For instance, public space is free to enter, but of which more is preferred to less, and is not a free good.

So what is a free good? Let’s take the air as an example. In the place where the air is fresh and clean, of air available is preferred to non-available. Even indispensable, but because it is so abundant that no one will pay a cost for more of it, the air is herein a free good. However, in a big city where the air is often impure, fresh and clean air becomes scarce. People are willing to pay a cost for more fresh and clean air, such as buying air purifiers, paying higher prices for houses with better greening. Air herein becomes an economic good. For underwater workers, the air is so scarce that they will pay a rather high price to buy bottled oxygen. Goods are almost economic goods, while free goods are rare and only exist under certain conditions, which means scarcity is ubiquitous.

Some may envision a future society with extreme material abundance. Can it be a society without scarcity where the distribution of goods could be according to people’s want? Let alone whether or not a society in the future can genuinely achieve such extreme material abundance that the supply of some goods is unlimited relative to human’s need, even if this could be true, would there be no scarcity?

In colleges, there are always empty seats in classrooms, because number of seats is higher than that of students. Since one student can only take one seat at a time, the supply of seats is unlimited relative to their needs. However, is there no scarcity for seats? Why are more front-row seats occupied while back-row ones mostly left empty? The key is the different qualities of seats! The front-row seats are good, while the back-row seats are bad ones. Thus, although the seats outnumber the students in the classroom, the good ones are still less than the students, so they are still scarce! The so-called good and bad emerge from comparison, so no matter how many seats there are in the classroom, there is only one seat that is the best. Otherwise, how can it be called “the best”? Similarly, there is also only one seat that is the second-best, and the same to the third, the fourth…best. There is always scarcity!

So this is the key to scarcity: if there is no quality difference among goods, increasing the number of goods can eliminate scarcity. However, the difference in the quality of goods leads to scarcity, even if the quantity of goods far exceeds the want.

Thus, in order to realize the ideal society without scarcity, we need not only extreme material abundance but also eliminate all the quality difference - including the quality difference among human beings. It is a pity that God created human being unfairly. Some persons, e.g. Einstein, are born with higher IQs. Maybe in that ideal society, a person would take an IQ test as he/she is just born, and if his/her IQ were higher than a “standard man,” some surgery would be needed to eliminate the higher part of IQ. Also, those whose physical quality is superior, such as sports stars, would need elimination operations. The question is, who would wish to live in such a “Brave New World”?

God created human being both fairly and unfairly. The unfairness has been talked about, while the fairness lies in the fact that no matter how mediocre in many aspects, one can always find a specific aspect superior to others. However, it may not be necessarily useful in the market, so it does not have a price. That is why most people are mediocre. If all the quality differences were to be eliminated, not only Einstein or sports stars would have to undertake the operation, but all of us would do so to eliminate every aspect of quality difference according to a “standard man.”