# Section 2: Competition, Competition Criterion, and Game rule

Human is self-interested, and the goods he wants is scarce, so there is naturally fight for the goods. Competition means self-interested people fight for scarce goods. There is always competition, as long as there are self-interest and scarcity.[^1] The following lectures will talk about the market structure, including free competition and monopoly. However, do not misunderstand that only in the free competition market there is competition while there is not in the monopoly market. There is still competition in the monopoly market, just in another form. So it is totally wrong that economics textbooks or some economists boast about the lack of competition.

In any competition, winners must be selected out of players, but how? Competition in sports is the most obvious one that people can experience, so let us take it as an example. For instance, in a running race, there is a standard or criterion of “speed” to select out the winner: the fastest runner wins, and slow ones lose. In order to make sure that the winner will be the fastest runner, there are a bunch of rules in the game. Such as all players should start from the same line and kick-off at the same time, and drugs are prohibited. Just imagine that if jumping the gun were allowed, the first person crossing the finishing line might not be the one who runs fastest. So the rules of the game are designed to establish the criterion of competition.

Let us generalize the above analysis. Suppose now we go to a grand theatre to enjoy an idol singer’s concert instead of taking a lecture in a college classroom. Surely there are more seats in the grand theatre than in the college classroom, but there are even much more people like to enjoy the concert. It is obvious that there is scarcity, so competition is inevitable. How to decide who wins and who loses? How to decide who can get those seats at the concert? For many, the first part of this question may not be easy to answer, but the latter part is rather easy, so almost everyone can answer without thinking, “Tickets for sale!” Bingo! This is precisely the criterion for deciding wins or loses: Price! Whoever is willing to pay the price of the ticket will get the designated seat, while whoever is unwilling will not get one. The essence of using price to decide the winners of the competition is the distribution of scarce goods by a price, which is commonly known as the market economy! In other words, the market economy is the price criterion for competition.

However, in reality, there are many other criteria other than the price criterion for competition.

Take the example of seats in college classroom mentioned above. Although the good seats are still scarce, they are allocated on a first-come-first-served basis instead of paying a price. The early birds occupy the better seat, while the later ones have to sit in back-row. Moreover, the seats may also be allocated by a teacher who has the right to decide which students can sit where, which is the case in elementary and secondary schools. The seats may also be allocated by age or longevity, which is precisely the hierarchical system of seniority. This kind of allocation for seats is prevalent at the meetings of government. The seats may also be allocated by voting, where who gets the most votes can take the best seat. This is so-called democracy. 

Last but not least, the seats may also be allocated by force. Although one may arrive first and occupy the best seat, if the latter student is much taller and stronger, and by waving his fist, one may be threatened to give up the best seat to him. This is so-called “the law of the jungle,” which is the law of nature, and rules not only human society but also the whole nature.

Criteria like these are countless, all of which are named as “non-pricing criteria” in economics because they all do not use price as the competition criterion.

Why does economics single out the price criterion and leave all other criteria to another category? Because among all the competition criteria, price criterion is the only one that does not lead to the so-called “waste.” The word “waste” is not entirely correct, so should be revised to the more strict term “rent dissipation” which is rather complicated, so will be explained in later lectures in detail. Whereas “waste” is commonly known and easy to understand, so it is used here to express the meaning of “rent dissipation” for the time being.

Why does price criterion not cause waste? Because with price criterion, those who want to obtain the scarce goods must pay a price, i.e. paying money. On the one hand, the money the buyers pay becomes the seller’s income, which means the money does not disappear in vain from the view of the whole society. On the other hand, where does the money paid by buyers come from? It comes from selling something needed by others in the market. That is to say, in order to satisfy his self-interest, one must benefit others first, to get money to take part in the competition. The more one contributes to others or the society, the more money he gets, and the higher the chance of winning the competition with price criterion. In the last lecture, it is mentioned that self-interest does not necessarily mean harming others, and, in many cases, altruism is the best way to self-interest. The market is precisely a system that guides the self-interested human to benefit others. From the above analysis, we can further understand how the market economy decides winners or losers by price criterion and guides the self-interested human to benefit others first in order to win in a competition.

Someone might doubt: if it is the price criterion that decides winners or losers, wouldn’t the rich always win? Firstly, with this competition criterion, the rich are indeed in a more favorable position, and that is exactly why people are motivated to seek more income by benefiting others and creating more wealth for society.

Secondly, even with the price criterion, the rich are just more capable of paying a high price than the poor. It means that they are less limited by the constraint of wealth, but not necessarily more willing to do so. Take the above pop star concert as an example. Let us assume the singer is an idol of the young who are willing to pay hundreds of RMB to buy tickets of the concert, while others are not attracted. The older persons who have worked for years are generally richer than most of the young, but will usually not pay, although they can afford the price. So, in the competition for tickets, the young though poor win, the old though rich lose. If the price of a ticket were low enough, such as a few dozens or even tens of RMB, the old might also be willing to pay. Nevertheless, when the price is too high - higher than what they think to be worth, they will not buy. Similarly, few people will buy high-grade fruit for dozens or even hundreds of RMB. Can’t they afford it? Impossible! Even the young who have not worked can afford hundreds of RMB to buy concert tickets for their idol. How come the old cannot afford the high-grade fruit? It is not that they cannot afford, but that they do not think it is worth the price, so will not buy.

Someone might also doubt: may the money people use to bid for goods necessarily come from their previous contributions to society? Maybe they get the money by stealing, robbing or cheating. First of all, in the last lecture, it has been analyzed in details that as long as there are effective laws to punish the crime of robbing, stealing, and cheating, a self-interested human will choose to get money by contributing to society, instead of by harming others. Morality will also condemn such harmful behaviors to increase the non-monetary costs. Secondly, as mentioned above, the criterion to decide winners or losers needs a bunch of game rules to establish it. These laws and morality are exactly the game rules that establish the price criterion!

If a person competes for scarce goods with the money by robbing, is it different from those who win a running race by jumping the gun or doping sneakily? Without the laws that effectively punish those who get money by harming others, a self-interested human will choose to harm instead of benefiting others. It is just as that if the game rules of running race do not forbid jumping the gun, self-interested runners will choose to try to train the technique of jumping the gun instead of reacting quickly to it.

Furthermore, if robbing is legal, the muggers can not only rob the money for bidding goods but also the goods themselves without paying any price at all. In this extreme circumstance, the price criterion for deciding winners or losers has fallen apart entirely.

In the later lectures, we will explain the legal system to establish the price criterion (i.e. the market economy). It is the system of protecting private property rights or PPRs - the law forbids robbing since it infringes the victim’s PPRs. The PPR is a very complex concept which will be explained in the later lectures. As a short introduction: PPRs include use right, the right to income, and the right to transfer. The legal system of protecting PPRs is the cornerstone of the market economy. It is just empty talk if we only talk about the market economy as a competition criterion without legal system as the game rule.

It is said that the market economy should be divided into a good one and bad one. The market economy in developed countries is a good one, while that in the vast majority of developing countries is a bad one although most of them are not socialist countries practicing planned economy. It is implied that in developed countries, the market economy is supported by the rule of law; while in developing countries, there is no rule of law, so they are overwhelmed by bureaucratic corruptions. There are also other different descriptions, such as “crony capitalism”. All of these are a severe misunderstanding about the market economy! Without an effective legal system as the cornerstone, there is impossible to be a market economy, because it is not the price criterion but other non-price criteria such as force and power that decide winners or losers of competitions. How can a running race that allows jumping the gun and doping be recognized as a normal one? So, the market economy is not divided into a good one and bad one, but rather into a true one and fake one!

- - -

[^1]: Strictly speaking, the condition of “society” must be added, and along with self-interest and scarcity can lead to competition. In a one-man world, no matter how self-interested a person is, he just needs to compete with nature and animals. However, economics as a social science is not concerned with this kind of competition. Economics focus on the competition among humans which only exist in society. The concept of “society” will be defined in the lecture of “transaction costs”.
