# Section 3: The Choice of Competition Criteria

As mentioned above, there is no so-called waste with price criterion to decide winners or losers of competition. However, other non-price criteria will undoubtedly result in waste more or less. For example, first-come-first-served will cause queuing. One stands in line with nothing else to do, and he has paid the cost of time - a kind of opportunity cost that will be explained in the later lecture about costs. While no one gets any benefit from his waiting, so he contributes nothing to society. That is why it is a waste. In contrast, if he pays the price directly, the seller will get the money which comes from the buyer’s previous contributions to society.

If it is up to the teacher to decide who gets the best seats, students will try to flatter the teacher, such as licking the shoes or even giving packets of money, which is equivalent to paying the price to the teacher. However, this kind of bribery is prohibited by law. The process of law enforcement (including reporting, filing, taking evidence, trial, and judgment, etc.) involves huge costs and is wasteful. If law enforcement is not strict, teachers will be careless in teaching but obsessed with how to collect packets of money from students skillfully.

If it is seniority that determines who can get good seats, obviously self-interested human will choose to do nothing but wait for getting older, which cause a waste similar to waiting in line. In state-owned enterprises where seniority prevails, there are significantly more “old dogs”, which is precisely one of the main reasons for the inefficiency there.

If the allocation of seats is decided by democratic voting, people will form pressure groups to lobby for votes. In the later lecture of “Political Economics,” we will explain why it is wasteful, and show that voting on specific issues will result in an infringement of PPRs.

If it is the law of the jungle that prevails, a human will keep strong and spend money on weapons. It is good to be strong, but if it is for harming others, instead of producing or creating more wealth, it is again a waste. Not to mention the weapons are made for massacre.

In conclusion, all non-price criteria of competition are bound to be more or less wasteful, which should be called “rent dissipation” in economic. Rent dissipation is a kind of transaction cost which will be talked about in details in the later lectures of “Transaction Cost” and “Rent Dissipation”.

As a smart reader, one might point out: since human is self-interested, and price criterion does not cause rent dissipation, while the non-price criterion surely does, self-interested human should only choose price criterion and never choose any non-price criteria. But this conclusion is obviously not consistent with the fact (i.e., rejected by the fact). The answer is: although price criterion does not cause so-called waste, the market transaction will cause transaction costs, which shall be explained in the later lecture of “Transaction Cost”. Also, in order to establish price criterion, there must be an effective legal system to protect PPRs as the game rule whose establishment and operation will also cost a lot, and it is also a kind of transaction cost. Again, the detailed explanation will be in the lecture of “Transaction Cost”, and here is only the brief main point. The cost of price criterion or market transaction is the transaction cost in a narrow sense, while the cost of the legal system is that in a broad sense.

Therefore, if price is chosen as competition criterion, there will be transaction cost, while if a non-price criterion is chosen, there will be rent dissipation which is also a kind of transaction cost. So, which will be chosen: price criterion or non-price one? The answer depends on the constraints in a specific circumstance. Under different constraints, the transaction costs involved in price criterion and non-price criterion will vary. Of course, self-interested human will choose the one that causes the least transaction cost.

Thus, the postulate of self-interest dominates all economic theories, and along with different constraints, determines all explanations of human behaviors.

The name “economics” is in fact somewhat misleading. A layperson would think that economics can only explain the human behaviors in the economic field. However, it is far beyond that field. The behavior of human choice, in the economic or other fields, can be explained by economics. This book has taken numerous examples to illustrate economic explanation which are not limited in the economic field but also involves other fields such as law, political science, history, sociology, and anthropology. From this perspective, the more accurate name for this discipline should be “Science of Human Behaviors”. Some call this as “economics imperialism” which means “invasion” into other fields of discipline by using the logic of economics. More appropriately, economics is the whole of social science, instead of just a part of it. Because social science is the study of human beings, and no social sciences other than economics has found suitable postulates, and base on them to construct a theoretical framework which is logically self-consistent and stand up facts test (i.e., “refutable”). Therefore, only based on the postulate of economics can other social sciences be regarded as “science”, which means they are part of economics, just the applications of economics in different fields.

Furthermore, as mentioned in the last lecture, there is an interdisciplinary “biological economics” nowadays, which extends the postulate of economics to natural sciences. By assuming non-human organisms (such as plants, or even genes) are self-interested, it explains some biological phenomena. Thus, in the broadest sense, economics is the science that can explain all of the following phenomena: by assuming the subjects (human or non-human) are self-interested, regard all phenomena of the subjects as their choice with purpose under certain constraints.

